THE ROUTLEDGE COMPANION  
TO REMIX STUDIES
The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  comprises contemporary texts by key authors 
and artists who are active in the emerging field of remix studies. As an organic interna -
tional movement, remix culture originated in the popular music culture of the 1970s, 
and has since grown into a rich cultural activity encompassing numerous forms of media.
The act of recombining pre-existing material brings up pressing questions of authen -
ticity, reception, authorship, copyright, and the techno-politics of media activism. This 
book approaches remix studies from various angles, including sections on history, aes -
thetics, ethics, politics, and practice, and presents theoretical chapters alongside case 
studies of remix projects. The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  is a valuable resource 
for both researchers and remix practitioners, as well as a teaching tool for instructors 
using remix practices in the classroom.
Eduardo Navas  is the author of Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  (Springer, 2012). 
He researches and teaches principles of cultural analytics and digital humanities in the 
School of Visual Arts at The Pennsylvania State University, PA. Navas is a 2010–12 Post-
Doctoral Fellow in the Department of Information Science and Media Studies at the 
University of Bergen, Norway, and received his PhD from the Program of Art and Media 
History, Theory, and Criticism at the University of California in San Diego.
Owen Gallagher  received his PhD in Visual Culture from the National College of Art 
and Design (NCAD) in Dublin. He is the founder of TotalRecut.com, an online com -
munity archive of remix videos, and a co-founder of the Remix Theory & Praxis seminar 
group. He is the author of a number of research papers and book chapters on remix 
culture, intellectual property, and visual semiotics. Owen is a lecturer of Web Media at 
Bahrain Polytechnic.
xtine burrough  is a media artist and educator. She has authored or edited several books 
including Foundations of Digital Art and Design  (New Riders, 2014) and Net Works: Case 
Studies in Web Art and Design  (Routledge, 2012). She believes in the transformative 
power of participatory, digital art. xtine bridges the gaps between histories, theories, and 
production in new media education.
This page intentionally left blank
THE ROUTLEDGE  
COMPANION TO REMIX  
STUDIES
Edited by
Eduardo Navas, Owen Gallagher,  
and xtine burrough
First published 2015
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Taylor & Francis
The right of the editors to be identified as the author of the editorial material, and of 
the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 
77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Routledge companion to remix studies/edited by Eduardo Navas, Owen Gallagher, 
and xtine Burrough
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Appropriation (Arts) 2. Remixes—History and criticism. I. Navas, Eduardo. II. 
Gallagher, Owen. III. Burrough, Xtine.
NX197.R38 2015
700.9′04—dc23
2014022804
ISBN: 978-0-415-71625-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-87999-4 (ebk)
Typeset in Goudy
by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UK
vCONTENTS
Acknowledgments  ix
List of Figures and Tables  xi
Notes on Contributors  xiv
Introduction  1
EDUARDO NA VAS, OWEN GALLAGHER,  
AND XTINE BURROUGH
PART I
History  13
 1 Remix and the Dialogic Engine of Culture: A Model for Generative 
Combinatoriality  15
MARTIN IRVINE
 2 A Rhetoric of Remix  43
SCOTT H. CHURCH
 3 Good Artists Copy; Great Artists Steal: Reflections on  
Cut-Copy-Paste Culture  54
STEFAN SONVILLA-WEISS
 4 Toward a Remix Culture: An Existential Perspective  68
VITO CAMPANELLI
 5 An Oral History of Sampling: From Turntables to Mashups  83
KEMBREW McLEOD
 6 Can I Borrow Your Proper Name? Remixing Signatures and the  
Contemporary Author  96
CICERO INACIO DA SIL VA
 7 The Extended Remix: Rhetoric and History  104
MARGIE BORSCHKE
 8 Culture and Remix: A Theory on Cultural Sublation  116
EDUARDO NA VAS
viCONTENTS
PART II
Aesthetics  133
 9 Remix Strategies in Social Media  135
LEV MANOVICH
10 Remixing Movies and Trailers Before and After the Digital Age  154
NICOLA MARIA DUSI
11 Remixing the Plague of Images: Video Art from Latin America in a 
Transnational Context  166
ERANDY VERGARA
12 Race and Remix: The Aesthetics of Race in the Visual and  
Performing Arts  179
TASHIMA THOMAS
13 Digital Poetics and Remix Culture: From the Artisanal Image to the 
Immaterial Image  192
MONICA TA VARES
14 The End of an Aura: Nostalgia, Memory, and the Haunting  
of Hip Hop  204
ROY CHRISTOPHER
15 Appropriation Is Activism  217
BYRON RUSSELL
PART III
Ethics  225
16 The Emerging Ethics of Networked Culture  227
ARAM SINNREICH
17 The Panopticon of Ethical Video Remix Practice  246
METTE BIRK
18 Cutting Scholarship Together/Apart: Rethinking the  
Political Economy of Scholarly Book Publishing  258
JANNEKE ADEMA
19 Copyright and Fair Use in Remix: From Alarmism to Action  270
PATRICIA AUFDERHEIDE
20 I Thought I Made a Vid, but Then You Told Me That I Didn’t:  
Aesthetics and Boundary Work in the Fan-Vidding Community  283
KATHARINA FREUND
21 Peeling the Layers of the Onion: Authorship in Mashup  
and Remix Cultures  296
JOHN LOGIE
22 remixthecontext (A Theoretical Fiction)  310
MARK AMERIKA
viiCONTENTS
PART IV
Politics  321
23 A Capital Remix  323
RACHEL O’DWYER
24 Remix Practices and Activism: A Semiotic Analysis  
of Creative Dissent  333
PAOLO PEVERINI
25 Political Remix Video as a Vernacular Discourse  346
OLIVIA CONTI
26 Locative Media as Remix  358
CONOR M cGARRIGLE
27 The Politics of John Lennon’s “Imagine”: Contextualizing  
the Roles of Mashups and New Media in Political Protest  374
J. MERYL KRIEGER
28 Détournement  as a Premise of the Remix from Political, Aesthetic,  
and Technical Perspectives  386
NADINE WANONO
29 The New Polymath (Remixing Knowledge)  397
RACHEL FALCONER
PART V
Practice  409
30 Crises of Meaning in Communities of Creative Appropriation:  
A Case Study of the 2010 RE/Mixed Media Festival  411
TOM TENNEY
31 Of Re/appropriations  425
GUSTA VO ROMANO
32 Aesthetics of Remix: Networked Interactive Objects and  
Interface Design  432
JONAH BRUCKER-COHEN
33 Reflections on the Amen Break: A Continued History,  
an Unsettled Ethics  444
NATE HARRISON
34 Going Crazy with Remix: A Classroom Study by Practice  
via Lenz v. Universal  453
XTINE BURROUGH AND EMILY ERICKSON
35 A Remix Artist and Advocate  461
DESIREE D’ALESSANDRO
36 Occupy/Band Aid Mashup: “Do They Know It’s Christmas?”  471
OWEN GALLAGHER
viiiCONTENTS
37 Remixing the Remix  480
ELISA KREISINGER
38 A Fair(y) Use Tale  487
ERIC S. FADEN
39 An Aesthetics of Deception in Political Remix Video  495
DIRAN LYONS
40 Radical Remix: Manifestoon  503
JESSE DREW
41 In Two Minds  509
KEVIN ATHERTON
Index  516
ixACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A major project such as an anthology for a field of studies is made possible thanks to the 
collaboration of many individuals who unselfishly support a book’s eventual publication. 
For this reason, we would like to thank all of the contributors who accepted our invita -
tion to participate and write a text that went through a long editing process. We would 
like to thank our editor at Routledge, Erica Wetter, for considering the proposal of a 
reader, and the editorial board at Routledge, who offered us this major project by induct -
ing what was once a smaller proposal into part of the Routledge Companion series. We 
also thank Simon Jacobs, Editorial Assistant at Routledge, who oversaw the book’s pro -
cess during its early stages, reviewed it, and prepared it for its final production. We thank 
the remix community, who participated in a survey we distributed during the proposal 
stage of this project. Their feedback was vital in determining the feasibility of a publica -
tion of this magnitude.
—Eduardo Navas, Owen Gallagher, and xtine burrough
I would like to thank Graeme Sullivan, Director of The School of Visual Arts at The 
Pennsylvania State University, for his support in the last two years that led to the 
eventual publication of The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies . I also thank Lev 
Manovich for his ongoing support in my research and activities. His unselfish critical 
feedback has always proven fruitful for all aspects of my practice. I also thank my fam -
ily, especially my wife and partner, Annie Mendoza, who gave me moral support and 
the time needed to finish such a long-term project. And I thank my two sons  
Oscar Eduardo and Oliver Antonio for constantly reminding me what is ultimately 
important in life.
—Eduardo Navas
I wish to extend my gratitude to Dr. Paul O’Brien and Professor Jessica Hemmings of 
the Faculty of Visual Culture, and Professor Des Bell, Head of Academic Affairs and 
Research at the National College of Art and Design (NCAD), Dublin, for their guid -
ance and support of my research over the past few years, leading to the publication of 
this volume. I also thank Brendan Muller, Web Media Programme Manager, for his 
support of my involvement in this project while simultaneously lecturing at Bahrain 
Polytechnic. I would like to thank my parents, Brendan and Frances Gallagher, for 
their unwavering encouragement and most importantly, I thank my wife, Aoife, and 
my daughters, Jennifer and Rebecca, for their love and support throughout this 
process.
—Owen Gallagher
xACKNOWLEDGMENTS
To my husband and partner, Paul Martin Lester, our two sons Parker and Martin, and to 
my parents Viola and Bill: the phrase “thank you” barely captures the essence of my 
gratitude. Your support, encouragement, wisdom, and silliness sustained me in this pro -
ject, as it always does. I would also like to fondly acknowledge my peers, as well as my 
life-long mentors, Christopher James, Steven Kurtz, and Humberto Ramirez for their 
ongoing support  . . . and silliness.
—xtine burrough
xiFIGURES
 1.1 Extending C. S. Peirce’s model of semiosis as a generative process  20
 8.1 The framework of culture before modernism  121
 8.2 The framework of culture during modernism  121
 8.3 The framework of culture during postmodernism  122
 8.4 The framework of culture during the time of networks (general stage)  122
 8.5 The framework of culture during the time of networks (meta stage)  123
10.1 Screen shots from Robert Blankenheim’s “ Titanic Two: the Surface ” 156
10.2 Screen shots from “The Shining—Sweded” by Paul Hurley  158
11.1 Stills from Viacrucis  by José Alejandro Restrepo, 2004  169
11.2 Stills from Cinepolis, La Capital Del Cine  by Ximena Cuevas, 2003  171
11.3 Stills from To Protect  by Graciela Fuentes, 2003  172
11.4 The scratching of a speech by Fidel Castro made visible in  
José Toirac’s Opus  (2005)  174
12.1 Manuel Arellano, Rendition of a Mulatto , 1711  181
12.2 Miguel Cabrera, From Spaniard and Mulata, Morisca , 1763  182
12.3 Carmen Miranda in Busby Berkeley’s The Gang’s All Here , 1943  184
16.1 Survey response means for commercial criterion  231
16.2 Survey response means for legal criterion  232
16.3 Survey response means for authenticity criterion  233
16.4 Survey response means for innovation criterion  234
16.5 Survey response means for morality criterion  235
16.6 Survey response means for continuity criterion  236
16.7 Survey response means for use value criterion  238
16.8 Survey response means for aesthetic criterion  239
16.9 Survey response means for power relations criterion  240
16.10  Survey response means for self-expression criterion  241
17.1 Attitudes toward ethical focal points  248
19.1 “Lord of the Rings Was Too Long” makes a funny feminist  
critique of Tolkien  273
19.2 A remixer critiques biased coverage of climate change  274
19.3 “Internet People” celebrates online video  275
20.1 “I thought I made a vid, but then you told me I didn’t” Internet meme  286
20.2 Screenshots of Displaced  by Milly  289
20.3 Ronon Dex (Jason Momoa) sparkles in this screenshot from  
Another Sunday  by jescaflowne  290
20.4 The original shot of Teyla Emmagan (Rachel Luttrell) in  
Another Sunday  is overlaid with a green color wash  290
21.1 The Stooges record cover  300
21.2 “Push It” record cover  302
xiiLIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
21.3 Salt-n-Pepa record  303
21.4 2 Many DJ’s album cover  306
24.1 “VW: The Dark Side,” Greenpeace  338
24.2 “Dove Onslaught(er),” I, Greenpeace  341
24.3 “Dove Onslaught(er),” II, Greenpeace  342
24.4 “Dove Onslaught(er),”III, Greenpeace  342
26.1 They Rule , Josh On  363
26.2 NAMAland , Conor McGarrigle, augmented reality app, 2010  364
26.3 NAMAland , Conor McGarrigle, screen capture  365
26.4 Participatory NAMAland  walk in Dublin  367
26.5 Welcome to NAMAland  intervention in Dublin  368
30.1 Tom Tenney portrayed a black-leather-jacketed Hamlet  
in Robert Wilson’s 1986 staging of Heiner Muller’s Hamletmachine  413
30.2 Jonathan McIntosh mashes up the Obama/McCain debate as an  
American Idol -esque reality show  416
30.3 Perry Bard’s Man with a Movie Camera: The Global Remake  417
30.4 Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize  
by Diran Lyons  419
32.1 LiveWindow , Jonah Brucker-Cohen, 2001  434
32.2 TweetingSeat , Chris McNicholl, 2012  434
32.3 BumpList , Jonah Brucker-Cohen and Mike Bennett, 2003  436
32.4 Crank the Web , Jonah Brucker-Cohen, 2001  439
33.1 Can I Get An Amen?  Sandroni Rey, Los Angeles, 2007  445
33.2 Can I Get An Amen?  YouTube screenshot  447
34.1 Dancing babies: Michael Girard’s 3D dancing baby; and Holden  
Lenz dances on YouTube  453
34.2 A likeness to the ubiquitous YouTube “sad face”  454
34.3 Student video responses to Lenz’s work can be viewed on the  
YouTube playlist  456
34.4 The complete interview with Stephanie Lenz is available online  457
35.1 “World Fair Use Day,” Desiree D’Alessandro  462
35.2 Moses as the messiah of fair use, Desiree D’Alessandro  463
35.3 “World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course Consumption,”  
Desiree D’Alessandro  463
35.4 “WHAT?! DMCA Violation (Step Brothers Remix),”  
Desiree D’Alessandro  464
35.5 “Woman Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver Remix),”  
Desiree D’Alessandro  465
35.6 “Open Video Conference (Step Brothers Remix),”  
Desiree D’Alessandro  465
35.7 “Ronda Rousey—She’s a Lady (UFC Remix),” Desiree D’Alessandro  466
35.8 Screenshot of the locked UCSB Internet home page  467
36.1 Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , Owen Gallagher, 2011  473
36.2 Electronic Superhighway , Nam June Paik, 1995  475
36.3 Critical Remix Video Wall , Owen Gallagher, 2014–  476
37.1 The Queer Carrie Project , Elisa Kreisinger, 2008  482
37.2 Don Loves Roger , Elisa Kreisinger, 2012  483
37.3 Mad Men: Set Me Free , Elisa Kreisinger, 2012  484
xiiiLIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
38.1 Stills from the video A Fair(y) Use Tale , Eric S. Faden, 2006  488
38.2 Stills from the video Mass Ornament Revisited , Eric S. Faden, 1998  489
38.3 Stills from the video Crowd Control , Eric S. Faden, 1999  490
39.1 Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize  
on IMDB.com  496
39.2 Obama Likes Spending (Project 12), 3/12 , Diran Lyons, 2010  497
39.3 99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix) , Diran Lyons, 2012  499
40.1 Still from Manifestoon  by Jesse Drew, 1995  507
41.1 In Two Minds , video performance, Project Arts Centre, Dublin,  
March 1978  509
41.2 In Two Minds , video installation, Serpentine Gallery, London,  
April 1978  511
41.3 Kevin Atherton, In Two Minds—Past Version , 1978–2006  511
41.4 In Two Minds—Past Version , video performance, Circa Projects,  
Newcastle upon Tyne, 2011  513
TABLES
 1.1 Levels in the parallel architecture of generative combinatoriality  25
16.1 Ethical dimensions for configurable culture  230
xivCONTRIBUTORS
Janneke Adema  is a Research Fellow in Digital Media at Coventry University where 
she is writing a PhD thesis on the future of the scholarly monograph. She is the author 
of the OAPEN report Overview of Open Access Models for eBooks in the Humanities and 
Social Sciences  (2010) and has published in New Formations, The International Journal 
of Cultural Studies, New Media & Society, New Review of Academic Librarianship, Krisis: 
Journal for Contemporary Philosophy, Scholarly and Research Communication, and 
LOGOS , among other publications. Together with Pete Woodbridge she has coedited 
a living book on Symbiosis  (Open Humanities Press, 2011). Her research can be fol -
lowed on www.openreflections.wordpress.com.
Mark Amerika  is an artist whose work has been exhibited internationally at venues 
such as the Whitney Biennial of American Art, the Denver Art Museum, the 
Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, and the Walker Art Center. In 2009–10, 
The National Museum of Contemporary Art in Athens, Greece, hosted Amerika’s 
comprehensive retrospective exhibition entitled UNREALTIME. In 2009, Amerika 
released Immobilité , generally considered the first feature-length art film ever shot 
on a mobile phone. He is the author of many books including remixthebook 
(University of Minnesota Press, 2011; remixthebook.com) and his collection of art -
ist writings entitled META/DATA: A Digital Poetics  (MIT Press, 2007). His latest 
art work, Museum of Glitch Aesthetics (glitchmuseum.com), was commissioned by 
the Abandon Normal Devices Festival in conjunction with the London 2012 
Olympics. The project was recently remixed for his survey exhibition, Glitch.Click.
Thunk, at the University Art Galleries at the University of Hawaii. Amerika is a 
Professor of Art and Art History at the University of Colorado at Boulder. In Fall 
2013, he was the Labex-H2H International Research Chair at the University of 
Paris 8. More information can found at his website, markamerika.com and at his 
T witter feed @markamerika.
Kevin Atherton  is an artist, fine art educator, and writer. A pioneering video and  
performance artist in Britain in the 1970s, in the 1980s Atherton went on to contrib -
ute to the redefinition of public art in the UK through his emphasis on the importance 
of site-specificity and produced a number of permanent public sculptures in a variety 
of media for a range of locations in the UK. In the 1990s he was Head of Fine Art 
Media at Chelsea College of Art, London where he established and ran the research 
project “Virtual Reality as a Fine Art Media” and in 2014, after 15 years of teaching 
in the Fine Art Faculty, he retired as the Head of Post Graduate Pathways at the 
National College of Art and Design, Dublin. In 2014–15 he exhibited a new version 
of In Two Minds  in the exhibition “Primal Architecture” at the Irish Museum of 
Modern Art, Dublin.
xvCONTRIBUTORS
Patricia Aufderheide  is University Professor in the School of Communication at 
American University in Washington, DC. She is the coauthor with Peter Jaszi of 
Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright  (University of Chicago 
Press, July 2011), and author of, among others, Documentary: A Very Short Introduction  
(Oxford, 2007), The Daily Planet  (University of Minnesota Press, 2000), and of 
Communications Policy in the Public Interest  (Guilford Press, 1999). She has been a 
Fulbright and John Simon Guggenheim fellow and has served as a juror at the 
Sundance Film Festival among others. Her awards include the Preservation and 
Scholarship award in 2006 from the International Documentary Association, a career 
achievement award in 2008 from the International Digital Media and Arts Association, 
and the Woman of Vision Award from Women in Film and Video (DC) in 2010.
Mette Birk  is a graduate from the Department of Media, Cognition, and Communication 
at University of Copenhagen. She has been active within the Remix Theory & Praxis 
online seminar group and on behalf of this group presented a paper on artist motiva -
tions at the Remix Cinema Workshop hosted by the Oxford Internet Institute. In 
2012 she wrote her dissertation on ethics in video remixing communities as a follow 
up on her bachelor’s thesis on motivations among trailer remixers. Currently she is 
working as a media researcher at the Danish Broadcasting Corporation with a primary 
focus on younger demographics.
Margie Borschke  is a Senior Lecturer in Journalism and Media at Macquarie University 
in Sydney, Australia. Her research focuses on media use and circulation with an 
emphasis on questions related to copies, copying practices, and material culture.
Jonah Brucker-Cohen  is an award-winning researcher, artist, and writer. He received 
his PhD in the Disruptive Design Team of the Electronic and Electrical Engineering 
Department of Trinity College Dublin. He has taught at Lehman College, New York 
University, Trinity College Dublin, Parsons The New School for Design and more. 
His work and thesis is titled Deconstructing Networks  and includes creative projects 
that critically challenge and subvert accepted perceptions of network interaction and 
experience. His work has been exhibited and showcased at venues such as San 
Francisco Museum of Modern Art, MOMA, ICA London, Whitney Museum of 
American Art (Artport), Palais du Tokyo, Tate Modern, Ars Electronica, Transmediale, 
and more. His writing has appeared in publications such as WIRED, Make, Gizmodo, 
Neural , and more. His Scrapyard Challenge workshops have been held in over 14 
countries in Europe, South America, North America, Asia, and Australia since 2003.
xtine burrough is a media artist and educator. She has authored, coauthored, edited, and 
coedited several books including Foundations of Digital Art and Design  (New Riders, 2014) 
and Net Works: Case Studies in Web Art and Design  (Routledge, 2012). She uses social 
networking, databases, search engines, blogs, and applications in combination with popu -
lar sites like Facebook, YouTube, or Mechanical Turk, to create Web communities promot -
ing interpretation and autonomy. xtine is passionate about creating works that transform 
social experiences. She is a Webby Honoree, has received a Terminal commission and an 
award from the UK Big Lottery fund. She is an associate professor at California State 
University Fullerton, where she bridges the gap between histories, theories, and produc -
tion in new media education. Her website is missconceptions.net.
xviCONTRIBUTORS
Vito Campanelli  (www.vitocampanelli.eu) is a writer and a new media theorist. His 
main research interest is technological imaginary. He is also a freelance curator of 
digital culture events and cofounder of MAO—Media & Arts Office. His essays are 
regularly published in international journals.
Roy Christopher  was assistant editor of Paul D. Miller aka DJ Spooky’s edited collection 
Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Culture and Music  (MIT Press, 2008). His first book 
is an anthology of interviews entitled Follow for Now: Interviews with Friends  and 
Heroes (Well-Red Bear, 2007), which Disinformation  named one of the most important 
books published in 2007, and which Erik Davis called, “a crisp and substantial remix 
of the major memes of the last decade or so.” Christopher is currently a Visiting 
Lecturer in the Department of Communication at The University of Illinois, Chicago 
and a PhD candidate in Communication Studies at The University of Texas, Austin. 
He is also working on a book about technological mediation and culture, titled The 
Medium Picture  and will be out in the near future on Zer0 Books. He lives in Chicago 
and writes regularly at roychristopher.com.
Scott H. Church  frequently teaches courses in popular culture, music, and media stud -
ies. His research primarily uses cultural criticism, aesthetics, and rhetorical theory as 
analytic lenses for digital media and mediated popular texts, as evidenced by his 2013 
dissertation “All Living Things are DJs: Rhetoric, Aesthetics, and Remix Culture.” 
During his graduate studies in the Department of Communication Studies at the 
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, his research earned him the departmental Phyllis 
Japp Scholar Award, a top paper honor from the Western States Communication 
Association, and a competitive invitation to present his research on remix at the 
National Communication Association’s Doctoral Honors Seminar. His research has 
also been published in The Information Society  and The Journal of Information Technology 
& Politics . He currently teaches at the University of Utah and resides in the Salt Lake 
Valley with his wife and four children.
Olivia Conti  is a PhD student in Rhetoric, Politics, and Culture in the Department of 
Communication Arts at the University of Wisconsin—Madison. Her research focus 
is digital rhetoric, specifically the ways in which users encounter and attempt to shape 
policy through their everyday online behavior and content production.
Desiree D’Alessandro  is a professor at the University of Tampa where she teaches 
classes in art and technology, digital video production, and digital citizenship. She 
has exhibited works at the Santa Barbara Museum of Art and Contemporary Arts 
Forum in California and the Brevard Art Museum, Atlantic Center for the Arts, and 
Tampa Museum of Art in Florida. Additionally her video works have screened at 
the European New Media Art Festival in Germany, the Experiments in Cinema 
Festival in New Mexico, the RE/Mixed Media Festival in New York, the Rogue 
Political Remix Festival in California, and the Festival of the Moving Image in 
Florida. Her writing has been published in ArtUS  and Transformative Works and 
Cultures  and she has presented at diverse conferences including the Open Video 
Conference in New York, International Conference on Arts and Humanities in 
Hawaii, Media Fields: Contested Territories in California, and Digital (De-)(Re-)
Territorializations in Ohio.
xviiCONTRIBUTORS
Cicero Inacio da Silva  has been a leading researcher in the Brazilian digital media art 
field for more than 20 years. He coordinates the Software Studies Initiative group in 
Brazil in partnership with the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and City 
University of New York (CUNY). He was digital art curator for the Brazilian Digital 
Culture Forum, digital communities honorary mention at the Prix Ars Electronica in 
2010. He was a visiting researcher at the Center for Research in Computing and the 
Arts (CRCA/UCSD) from 2006 to 2010 and a visiting scholar at Brown University 
(2005). He was a digital media art curator for several media art festivals including the 
Electronic Language International Festival (FILE) and the Digital Culture Festival in 
Brazil. His vitae includes associations with key digital media thinkers such as Ted 
Nelson, Lev Manovich, and George Landow. He currently holds an appointment as a 
digital media tenured adjunct professor at the Federal University of São Paulo 
(UNIFESP).
Jesse Drew ’s research and practice centers on alternative and community media and 
their impact on democratic societies, with a particular emphasis on the global work -
ing class. His audiovisual work, represented by Video Data Bank, has been exhibited 
at festivals and in galleries internationally. Open Country  is his current film project, 
a feature documentary on the politics of American Country music. His writings 
have appeared in numerous publications, journals, and anthologies, including 
Resisting the Virtual Life  (City Lights Press, 1995), At a Distance (MIT Press, 2005), 
Collectivism After Modernism (University of Minnesota, 2007), West of Eden (PM 
Press, 2012). His new book is A Social History of Contemporary Democratic Media 
(Routledge, 2013). He is currently professor of Cinema and Technoculture at UC 
Davis, where he teaches media archaeology, radio production, documentary studies, 
electronics for artists, and community media. Before coming to UC Davis he headed 
the Center for Digital Media and was Associate Dean at the San Francisco Art 
Institute.
Nicola Maria Dusi , PhD in Semiotics, is Senior Lecturer of Media Semiotics at the 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy), Department of Communication 
and Economics. He is the author of the semiotic essay Il cinema come traduzione  
(Turin: Utet, 2003). H e coedited the essay Remix–Remake . Pratiche di replicabilità  
(Rome: Meltemi, 2006) and the essay Matthew Barney: Polimorfismo, multimodalità, 
neobarocco  (Milan: Silvana Editoriale, 2012). He also coedited some monographic 
issues of international journals: Versus (85–87, 2000) dedicated to “Intersemiotic 
Translation”; Iris (30, 2004) dedicated to “Film Adaptation: Methodological 
Questions, Aesthetic Questions”; and Degrés  (141, 2010) about “Dance Research 
and Transmedia Practices.”
Emily Erickson  is an award-winning teacher who specializes in media law and has 
taught and developed several original communications courses as well. Her research 
focuses on First Amendment jurisprudence and the role of journalists in public records 
policy, an interest propelled by her work in helping create Alabama’s first freedom of 
information group. She is the coeditor of Contemporary Media Issues and has published 
legal and communications research in a number of academic journals. In 2014 she 
authored “The Watchdog Joins the Fray: The Press, Records Audits, and State Access 
Reform” for  Journalism & Communication Monographs .
xviiiCONTRIBUTORS
Eric S. Faden  is an Associate Professor of English and Film/Media Studies at Bucknell 
University (Lewisburg, PA). He studies early cinema and digital image technologies. 
He also creates film, video, and multimedia projects that imagine how scholarly 
research might appear as visual media. These works appear in a variety of modes 
including traditional documentary, scholarly video essays, and avant-garde remixes. 
In addition, he also works as a commercial filmmaker with a broad range of clients 
from a biotech start-up to a US Federal Judge as well as advocacy groups like the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Independent Film & Television Alliance.
Rachel Falconer  is a curator, writer, and producer operating at the intersections of tech -
nology, networked behavior, and contemporary art. She is Head of Art and Technology 
at The White Building (London’s center for art, technology, and sustainability) and 
structures an internationally acclaimed residency program in association with Eyebeam, 
LUX, The Goethe-Institut , IASPIS, and Bloomberg. As coeditor at Furtherfield she 
regularly contributes articles to the Furtherfield network and is a founding member of 
the collective Hardcore Software. She is regularly invited to participate in exhibitions, 
panel discussions, and events in her field—including at the Tate, the Barbican, the 
Royal College of Art, Rhizome, Furtherfield, and Goldsmiths University. Her practice 
is hybrid and interdisciplinary in approach, and she draws on her international experi -
ence in the viral advertising and gaming industries to inform her systems-based practice. 
Her ongoing research focuses on the pathologies surrounding distributed knowledge 
production and consumption and networked behavior patterns.
Katharina Freund  completed her PhD in digital communication at the University of 
Wollongong in Australia. Her dissertation analyzed the online community of fan vid -
ders, discussing how fanvids reimagine televisual texts. She is now pursuing an  
alt-ac career as a digital learning developer at the Australian National University and 
writes about fanvids and online communities in her spare time.
Owen Gallagher  received his PhD in Visual Culture from the National College of Art 
and Design (NCAD) in Dublin. He is the founder of TotalRecut.com, an online com -
munity of video remixers and archive of remix videos. He is a co-founder of the Remix 
Theory & Praxis seminar group and author of a number of research papers, articles and 
book chapters on remix culture, intellectual property, and visual semiotics. He is a 
lecturer of Web Media at Bahrain Polytechnic, where he teaches audio and video 
postproduction, 3D animation, and advanced interactive applications, as well as pro -
ducing and publishing his own remix videos.
Nate Harrison  is an artist and writer working at the intersection of intellectual property, 
cultural production, and the formation of creative processes in modern media. He has 
both exhibited and lectured internationally. He serves on the faculty at the School of 
the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. He is the recipient of the 2011 Videonale Prize as 
well as the 2013 Hannah Arendt Prize in Critical Theory and Creative Research. He 
is completing his doctoral dissertation “Appropriation Art and Intellectual Property: 
Rethinking Authorial Agency in Postmodernity and Beyond” at the University of 
California, San Diego.
Martin Irvine  is the Founding Director of the graduate program in Communication, 
Culture, and Technology at Georgetown University where he has been a professor for 
xixCONTRIBUTORS
over 20 years. His research, publications, and teaching span a wide range of fields, 
including classical and modern languages and literature, philosophy, semiotics, art 
history, media theory, and the Internet and digital media. He has a PhD from Harvard 
University, where he also learned computing and became the first liberal arts student 
to write a dissertation on a computer. He has been a pioneer and advocate of Internet 
and Web computing in the university since the early 1990s. He has recently published 
on street art and the city, and is currently working on a book that presents a new 
interdisciplinary view of semiotics and media theory. He has also been active in the 
art and music communities as a gallery curator and promoter of contemporary music.
Elisa Kreisinger  is a Brooklyn-based pop culture hacker mashing up Mad Men  into femi -
nists and The Real Housewives  into lesbians. Her 2012 US Copyright Office testimony 
helped win crucial exemptions to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, decriminal -
izing DVD ripping for artistic statements. She is a contributor to The Book of Jezebel  
and The Future of Now: Making Sense of Our Always On, Always Connected World . A 
former fellow at the Center for Social Media at American University and artist-in-
residence at Public Knowledge and Eyebeam Art and Technology Center, Elisa cur -
rently speaks around the world on the power of remix and remaking pop culture.
J. Meryl Krieger ’s research into remix and mashup video is a logical extension of earlier 
research. She began exploring the ways that media creators and culture producers 
interact with recording and production technologies, first in face-to-face audio record -
ing sessions and later in online production spaces. Her current research explores how 
creative and improvisatory modes of performance are translated through online media 
technologies including remixing, pre-, and postproduction issues of crowdfunding and 
crowdsourcing, and the impact of these technologies on local performing communities 
in the United States. She teaches part-time on issues of gender, technology, and popu -
lar culture as sociological issues at Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis.
John Logie  is an Associate Professor of Rhetoric in the Department of Writing Studies 
at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. His work has centered on authorship, 
copyright, and rhetorical invention, with a particular emphasis on these topics as 
informed by the advent of networked digital media. His 2006 book Peers, Pirates, and 
Persuasion: Rhetoric in the Peer-to-Peer Debates  (Parlor Press) focused on the mischar -
acterizations of peer-to-peer technologies as facilitators of “piracy” and “sharing.” This 
book was made freely available (and remains freely available) via a Creative Commons 
license. His work is directed at maximizing access to creative work—for creators and 
consumers—by streamlining and recalibrating copyright laws to reflect the realities of 
twenty-first century technologies.
Diran Lyons  produces political remix videos which have been featured by Billboard, 
Boing Boing, Entertainment Weekly, Huffington Post, Mashable, MSN, NY Magazine, 
OC Weekly, SF Weekly, Slate, Time, VIBE, WIRED , and the IMDb most popular short 
film ratings, where he was the first remix artist ever to reach Number One. Examples 
of his remix work have been presented at Ars Electronica in Linz, Austria, Cut Up at 
Museum of the Moving Image in New York, and ROFLcon at Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. Lyons’s participation in notable film festivals and video exhibitions 
includes LA Shorts Fest in Hollywood, CA; Athens Video Art Festival in Athens, 
xxCONTRIBUTORS
Greece; RE/Mixed Media Festival in Brooklyn, NY; Antimatter Film Festival in 
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; Reuse Aloud at The NewBridge Project in 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK; SAME OCEAN at The Armory Center for the Arts in 
Pasadena, CA; among others. His viral video  99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix) won 
the Pirate Flix Video Remix contest, juried by Cory Doctorow.
Lev Manovich  is the author of Software Takes Command (Bloomsbury Academic, 
2013), Soft Cinema: Navigating the Database  (MIT Press, 2005), and The Language of 
New Media  (MIT Press, 2001) which was described as “the most suggestive and broad 
ranging media history since Marshall McLuhan.” Manovich is a Professor at The 
Graduate Center, City University of New York (CUNY), and a Director of the 
Software Studies Initiative which works on the analysis and visualization of big cul -
tural data. In 2013 he appeared on the List of “25 People Shaping the Future of 
Design” (between Casey Reas at no. 1 and Jonathan Ive at no. 3).
Conor McGarrigle is an Irish new media artist, researcher, and educator working at the 
intersection of digital networks and real space. His work is concerned with the inte -
gration of digital technologies into the everyday, the spatial implications of location-
aware mobile devices, and the social, political, and cultural implications of big data. 
His practice is characterized by urban interventions mediated through digital tech -
nologies that explore the avant-garde legacy of walking as art reimagined for the 
smartphone age. Projects have included a drive along the longest street in the US 
documented by satellite, data mining Vine to create a 24-hour portrait of social media 
as performance, iPhone apps that create spatial remixes of literary texts and aug -
mented reality mappings of the geography of the Irish financial collapse. His work has 
been exhibited in over 70 exhibitions worldwide including the 2011 Venice Biennale, 
Fundació Miro in Mallorca, the St. Etienne Biennale, EVA International, 
SIGGRAPH, Site Santa Fe and FILE São Paulo. He is an Assistant Professor in the 
Emergent Digital Practices program at the University of Denver.
Kembrew McLeod  is a writer, filmmaker, and Professor of Communication Studies at 
the University of Iowa. He has published and produced several books and documen -
taries about music, popular culture and copyright law—including Pranksters  (New 
York University Press, 2014) and Freedom of Expression® (University of Minnesota 
Press, 2007), which received the American Library Association’s Oboler book award. 
Copyright Criminals  aired on PBS’s Emmy Award-winning documentary series 
Independent Lens , and his writing has appeared in The New York Times, Los Angeles 
Times, Village Voice, Slate, Salon, SPIN , and Rolling Stone .
Eduardo Navas  is the author of Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  (Springer, 
2012). He implements methodologies of cultural analytics and digital humanities to 
research the crossover of art and media in culture. He has been a juror for Turbulence.
org (Boston) in 2004, Rhizome.org (New York City) in 2006–07, and Terminal Awards 
in 2011. He was a nominee for the 2005 Rockefeller Foundation New Media 
Fellowship. Navas was also consultant for Creative Capital (NYC) in 2008–09. He 
was Gallery Coordinator, Researcher and Senior Writer for gallery@calit2, UC San 
Diego in 2008. He has lectured on art and media theory, and art history, as well as 
studio practice at various colleges and universities in the United States. Navas 
xxiCONTRIBUTORS
currently researches and teaches in The School of Visual Arts at The Pennsylvania 
State University, PA. Navas is a 2010–12 Post-Doctoral Fellow in the Department of 
Information Science and Media Studies at the University of Bergen, Norway. He 
received his PhD from the Program of Art History, Theory, and Criticism at the 
University of California in San Diego.
Rachel O’Dwyer  is a lecturer in the school of computer science in Trinity College 
Dublin where she teaches masters courses in media theory, technology studies, and 
physical computing. She is the founding editor-in-chief of the journal Interference 
(www.interferencejournal.com), the leader of the Dublin Art and Technology 
Association and the curator of the openhere festival (www.openhere.data.ie). She is 
a regular contributor to Neural  magazine (www.neural.it) and has published broadly 
on issues including open source, the digital commons and sound studies, most recently 
in Fibreculture  and Ephemera .
Paolo Peverini  is assistant professor in Media Semiotics at Luiss Guido Carli University 
of Rome, Department of Political Science and member of CMCS (Centre of Media 
and Communication Studies “Massimo Baldini”). In 2013, as a visiting professor, he 
participated in the XIX Colóquio do Centro de Pesquisas Sociossemióticas.  He gave 
lectures at the University Tuiuti do Paraná of Curitiba and at the ESPM of São Paulo. 
His publications include Social guerrilla. Semiotica della comunicazione non convenzionale  
(in press), “Environmental issues in unconventional social advertising. A semiotic 
perspective” ( Semiotica  vol. 2014, issue 199), “ A efetividade das imagens na comuni -
cação de interesse público: estratégias de veridicção” ( 19° Caderno de Discussao do 
Centro de Pesquisas Sociossemioticas PUC-SP ), “Manipulaciones en la red. El mashup 
como consumo creativo” ( Revista de Occidente,  n° 370, 2012), I media: strumenti di 
analisi semiotica  (2012), Unconventional. Valori, testi, pratiche della pubblicità sociale 
(2009), Il videoclip. Strategie e figure di una forma breve  (2004).
Gustavo Romano  is an artist and curator who was born in 1958 in Buenos Aires, and 
lives and works in Madrid. In 1995 he founded Fin del Mundo, one of the first plat -
forms for net art in Latin America. He was curator of the Virtual Space of the Centro 
Cultural Center of Buenos Aires, where he created and directed its Medialab. In 2006 
he published the book Netart.ib , an overview of digital production in Ibero-America. 
He coordinates the NETescopio project, an archive of digital works of the MEIAC, a 
contemporary art museum in Spain. As an artist he has taken part in numerous inter -
national events, among them the 7th Havana Biennale; the 1st Singapore Biennale; 
the 2nd Mercosur Biennale; the 1st Fin del Mundo Biennale, Ushuaia [Argentina]; la 
Videonale 11, Bonn; Transmediale 03 Berlin; Ars Electronica 97, Vienna; Madrid 
Abierto; Transitio MX. He has received numerous prizes, among them, a Guggenheim 
Fellowship and a VIDA Prize of Telefonica Foundation.
Byron Russell  is an artist, writer, and educator deeply interested in the creative poten -
tial and human implications of technology. In addition to remix theory, practice, and 
curating, his artistic practice includes site-specific interactive installations, the most 
recent of which, “The Master Control Station and Heptagon Server Monolith,” was 
exhibited at the 2014 Bay Area Maker Faire and received an Editor’s Choice award. 
An adjunct faculty member at Fresno City College, he teaches digital video 
xxiiCONTRIBUTORS
production, 2D and 3D animation and storyboarding. He received his BA in Art from 
Pomona College and his MFA in Motion Picture Producing from the Peter Stark 
Program of the USC School of Cinema/Television.
Aram Sinnreich  is an assistant professor at Rutgers University’s School of Communication 
and Information, and the author of the 2010 book Mashed Up: Music, Technology and 
the Rise of Configurable Culture  (University of Massachusetts Press), as well as the 2013 
book The Piracy Crusade: How the Music Industry’s War on Sharing Destroys Markets and 
Erodes Civil Liberties  (University of Massachusetts Press). He has written about music, 
media, and technology for The New York Times, Billboard , and WIRED , has testified 
as an expert witness in several cases including the Supreme Court file sharing suit 
MGM vs. Grokster , and has offered his expertise as an analyst and consultant to hun -
dreds of companies, from the Fortune 500 to fledgling startups, since 1997. Sinnreich 
holds an MS from the Columbia University School of Journalism, as well as an MA 
and a PhD in Communication from the USC Annenberg School for Communication 
& Journalism.
Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss  is professor and head of the international Master of Arts program 
ePedagogy Design—Visual Knowledge Building at Aalto University/School of Art 
and Design, Helsinki. For the last 20 years he has worked as art and design teacher, 
media artist, graphic designer, author, multimedia-developer, and university professor. 
His international activities as researcher, artist, and speaker brought him to many 
institutions around the world, including Oxford University—Internet Institute, Seoul 
National University—Design Talks, National Institute of Multimedia Education 
Tokyo, University of the Arts London, Zurich University of the Arts, University of 
Arts and Industrial Design Linz, ZKM Karlsruhe. He is the author of Synthesis & 
Nullification. Works 1991–2011  (Springer, 2012), (In)visible. Learning to Act in the 
Metaverse  (Springer, 2008), Virtual School—kunstnetzwerk.at  (Peter Lang, 2003), and 
he has edited Mashup Cultures (Springer, 2010) and (e) Pedagogy Design—Visual 
Knowledge Building  (Peter Lang, 2005).
Monica Tavares  is Associate Professor at the Department of Visual Arts at School of 
Communications and Arts at University of São Paulo, Brazil. She is a Visiting Scholar 
at Cornell University (2013–14) and at Pennsylvania State University (2008–09). 
She received a PhD in Arts from the University of São Paulo (2001) and a Master’s 
degree in Multimedia from the State University of Campinas (1995). She is a licensed 
architect from the School of Architecture and Urbanism at Federal University of 
Bahia (1982) and has experience in communication, focusing on visual communica -
tion, acting on the following subjects: design, media art, and aesthetics.
Tom Tenney  is a New York-based producer, arts journalist, educator, and the founder 
and director of the RE/Mixed Media Festival. His work as a producer, director, and 
performer has been seen in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Boston, and several 
cities throughout Europe. Tom received his MA in Media Studies from the New 
School in NYC and his BFA (Bachelor of Fun Arts) from Ringling Brothers & 
Barnum & Bailey Clown College. He has been a guest lecturer at the School of 
Visual Arts (SVA), and currently teaches a variety of media studies courses at 
Hofstra University.
xxiiiCONTRIBUTORS
Tashima Thomas  is a PhD candidate in the Art History department at Rutgers, the 
State University of New Jersey. She specializes in the art of the African Diaspora in 
the Americas and her work focuses on food pathways, commodity fetishism, and the 
consumption of culture. She holds a BA in Art History from the University of Houston 
and an MA in Art History from San Diego State University. She is a Ford Foundation 
Pre-Doctoral Fellow and the recipient of the Goldman Sachs Multicultural Afrolatino 
Junior Fellowship at the Smithsonian. Her interests include: visual culture, fashion, 
film, music, food studies, popular culture, remix theory, and critical race theory.
Erandy Vergara  is an independent curator and a PhD candidate in Art History at 
McGill University. She is a recipient of the Doctoral Fellowship from the SSHRC and 
the FQRSC.  Her research interests include media art, global art histories, curatorial 
studies, Latin American studies, postcolonialism, and critical race studies. Her writing 
has been published in books and journals including: “ [Ready] Media: Towards an 
archeology of Media and Invention in Mexico” (2013), and “Points, Pixels and Inches: 
Fragments of a Discourse of Digital Images.” Some of her curatorial projects include 
“Parallel Visions” held at the Manchester Digital Laboratory, UK, and “Curating 
Mexican Video Art: A Historical Survey,” held at the Laboratorio Arte Alameda, 
Mexico. She blogs at http://heartelectronico.org.
Nadine Wanono  has a research tenure position at the CNRS: Institut des Mondes  
africains . She took part in the workshop organized by Jean Rouch in Mozambique 
(1977–79). She conducted her field work among the Dogon people in Mali, where she 
produced several films which were selected by numerous ethnographic film festivals 
and broadcast on Arte. As Visiting Associate Professor at UCSB, she started research 
on the role and impact of digital technologies in visual anthropology. In 2005–07, she 
conducted a seminar on the subject Singularités et Technologie . From 2011 she initiated 
a collaboration with Le Cube, digital art center (www.lecube.com), to present an 
encounter entitled Digital Anthropologies. In 2012, she coedited a special issue of the 
Journal des anthropologues  entitled Creation and Transmission in Visual Anthropology, 
No. 130/131.
This page intentionally left blank
INTRODUCTION
Eduardo Navas, Owen Gallagher,  
and xtine burrough
The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  includes a set of selected texts from different 
fields of research that reflect on the history and ongoing development of remix culture. 
The chapters offer varied critical and historical approaches to the act of remixing, thus 
making evident the direct connection of remix studies to previous schools of thought. 
Remix studies is the result of a long process of rich cultural production directly informed 
by computing technology. However, while remix, as an activity and a scholarly pursuit, 
enjoys much international attention, it has no concrete paradigm of reference. Its inter -
disciplinary nature demands a fragmented approach that is self-aware of its main role as 
a point of entry to enrich ongoing discourse in the respective fields that use it to expand 
their specific research interests. Consequently, The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies 
aims to function as a framework that extends beyond book form to support a growing 
community by offering a concrete point of reference based around ongoing discussions 
and online resources.
The motivation to develop a remix studies reader came out of our many exchanges 
with other like-minded researchers. We have been active at international conferences 
such as the Remix Cinema Workshop (Oxford, 2011) and the Open Video Conference 
(New York, 2010), Bastard Pop Conference at Museo Universitario del Chopo (Mexico 
City, 2013), as well as the Remixed Media Festival (New York City, 2012, 2014) among 
others. During 2009–2011, a series of seminars organized by Owen Gallagher developed 
international interest to the point that researchers, professors, and graduate students 
from different parts of the world joined the discussions. It became evident that certain 
themes recurred, and this led us to consider editing this book as a demonstration of 
remix as a rich, scholarly field of research.
Remix studies branches out of remix culture, an organic international movement that 
began around the late Nineties, which is closely linked to open source and do-it-yourself 
(DIY) activities that became relevant on the Internet around that time. Copyright law -
yer and activist Lawrence Lessig contributed to making the term “remix culture” popular 
when he founded Creative Commons in 2001. The fundamental concept of remix cul -
ture is based on the act of using preexisting materials to create something new as desired 
by any creator—from amateurs to professionals. As a practice, remix was first made 
popular in music communities, such as disco and hip hop, beginning in the 1970s, ini -
tially in New York City. The creative activity of remixing music became a trend that 
eventually spread to major cities all over the world. Though this is often a popular 
understanding of the roots of remix, some contributors in this publication question this 
usual contextualization. Various remix theorists argue that positive attitudes relating to 
2
E. NA VAS ET AL.musical remixes changed how people understood their creative output and its relation -
ship to intellectual property. Needless to say, the premise of remixing has led to major 
legal conflicts between the private sector and growing social media communities on the 
Internet.
For such reasons the focus of many conferences and much of the literature on remix 
deals with issues that bring together copyright and cultural production based on inter -
disciplinary approaches by activists, who may be lawyers or economists, as well as cul -
tural critics, computer engineers, and artists. Due to the interdisciplinarity of remix 
culture, remix studies is becoming a complex field. Its position in relation to other 
contemporary fields of research, especially the digital humanities, is ripe for analysis. 
Many researchers who attend conferences and write about remix culture align them -
selves with this paradigm, including the editors of this publication.
The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  is primarily written for scholars (including 
researchers, lecturers, and students) interested in some or all aspects of remix studies, 
across a range of academic disciplines. Such fields include art education, art history and 
theory, communication studies, composition and rhetoric studies, critical theory, design, 
digital humanities, media and cultural studies, musicology, new media studies, studio art 
practice, visual culture, and among many others in diverse fields in the humanities and 
social sciences. We also aim for this collection to be accessible and of interest to media 
professionals, amateur remix practitioners and members of the general public with an 
interest in remix. In short, the only prerequisite for anyone who wants to engage with 
this book is a basic interest in remix—as an activity, as a discourse, or both.
The essays comprising this volume demonstrate that creative production is a political 
activity. For remixers, there is often friction between creative freedom, intellectual prop -
erty, and copyright law. For this reason many, if not most, of the texts included reflect 
directly or indirectly on the implications of intellectual property and creativity. A few 
texts expose polemical instances of fair use injustice, while others shed light on possibili -
ties to compromise while pushing for more open spaces that support collective-critical 
reflection. Others are more radical, and demand or, at least, make a strong case for radi -
cal changes to intellectual property laws, while developing a more historically informed 
attitude toward collective creativity.
This very publication is not exempt from the politics of authorship and copyright. In 
effect, the 41 chapters that comprise this volume are published with one of the most tra -
ditional copyright contracts between author and publisher. This certainly is a paradoxical 
position. As editors, we tried to negotiate for a more flexible contract to the best of our 
abilities, but we were not successful (again, compromise is at play and readers should 
understand that this volume is among others in the “Companion” series that Routledge 
has developed with the same copyright policy). As a result some contributors left the 
project, while others stayed because, like us, they believe in the debate this publication 
can lead to, even under a traditional copyright agreement. One of the reasons we were 
unable to include the work of some contributors we initially approached is that they 
wished for the book, or at least their contribution, to be released under a less restrictive 
copyright agreement, from nonexclusive terms to a “copyleft” Creative Commons license. 
Such uncompromising ideals are admirable, and we understand the position our peers have 
taken in this regard. However, our hope is that because this book is published with a tra -
ditional copyright, it will help to draw attention to and encourage discussions among the 
remix community, publishers, and media corporations, about the complex intellectual 
property issues facing creators in the contemporary media environment.
3
INTRODUCTIONAnother reason we believe that publishing these essays with Routledge as a schol -
arly book with a traditional copyright is a positive step toward a more open future 
for creativity is that, in our view, such a publication will function well within spaces 
that resist radical change—as opposed to trying to create change from the outside. 
For this reason the Companion  is designed to be read by practitioners, scholars, and 
researchers, who are already involved in remix studies as well as others who gener -
ally may not be interested in the field itself, but who share a concern with the issues 
it faces. Our aim is to bring these individuals together, or at least make them aware 
of issues that are not fully being discussed in their respective fields using the same 
language. We hope that The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  becomes a  
concrete stepping stone that functions from within the very system that all of its 
contributors are trying to change for the future of creativity in an increasingly net -
worked culture.
This volume is not just a book. We expect to produce ongoing discussions and 
resources online to encourage users to engage with the content in an interactive way. 
The book’s companion website, www.remixstudies.com, will act as the central hub 
through which readers may find additional chapter content, classroom resources, dis -
cussion forums, seminars and expanding archives of remixed media. We hope to use 
the website to facilitate a growing network of scholars interested in remix studies, to 
share ideas and content and engage in meaning -
ful discourse with like-minded individuals.
Given the many facets of remix and its inter -
disciplinarity in research and practice, The 
Routledge Companion to Remix Studies  is organized 
into five major parts: History, Aesthetics, Ethics, 
Politics, and Practice. The chapters under each 
heading, while certainly relevant to the focus of 
their respective parts, more often than not crosso -
ver to other areas. It is also worth noting that quite a few of the texts adopt differing 
positions and also contextualize the history of remix with multidisciplinary emphases on 
important cultural moments. The anthology in effect begins to function more like a 
contextual collage that sheds light on the complexity of remix as a cultural and political 
activity.
Part I: History
The History part includes essays that reflect upon and reconsider the history of remix. 
While the concept of remixing was originally made popular in music culture during the 
late 1970s, throughout the 1980s and 1990s the act of recombining preexisting material 
was, as it still is, often used to reference and contextualize prior acts of recombination 
in all forms of media. One of the aims of this part is to provide a critical analysis of the 
complex history of remix in relation to other theories of recombination. The chapters 
assess how principles of remix have been at play from the early days of rhetoric to our 
contemporary times of media saturation.
The part opens with Martin Irvine’s contribution “Remix and the Dialogic Engine of 
Culture: A Model for Generative Combinatoriality” which makes a clear case for remix 
as part of a rich history of communication relying on hybridity and recombinational 
strategies that has been in place well before the concept of remix was being used to Practice part contributions that  
relate to the History part include 
Chapter 33  by Nate Harrison, 
Chapter 40  by Jesse Drew, and 
Chapter 41  by Kevin Atherton.
4
E. NA VAS ET AL.discuss hybrid works. Irvine relies on concepts of dialogism as well as cognitive research. 
Particularly, he cites the research of Mikhail Bakhtin and Charles Sanders Peirce to 
trace how meaning is created, recontextualized, and extended in all forms of communi -
cation. Irvine’s argument is that the elements at play in remix include a broad set of 
variables closely linked to semiosis and linguistics. Scott H. Church, in his text “A 
Rhetoric of Remix,” repositions remix as a form of mimesis—or, at the very least, an 
extension of the long tradition of rhetorical practice. He specifically focuses on the work 
of Isocrates to develop a comparative analysis of remix and rhetoric. Church argues that 
remix is part of a long tradition that should be understood as part of a complex web of 
activities at the very foundations of Western tradition.
Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss’s contribution “Good Artists Copy; Great Artists Steal: 
Reflections on Cut-Copy-Paste Culture,” focuses on major shifts of the early modern 
period and industrialization that clearly expose our necessity to collaborate and produce 
cultural artifacts and meaning. He argues that the printing press already exposed the 
contradiction of creativity currently at play in contemporary times for collective produc -
tion. Consequently, he offers an elaborate conceptual map, beginning in the nineteenth 
century, of major developments that inform the act of remixing as it is currently under -
stood across the history of various disciplines in the humanities. Vito Campanelli’s 
“Toward a Remix Culture: An Existential Perspective” relates the research of Vilém 
Flusser to remix as a rhetorical practice, and proposes the argument that a creative work 
is never completed but rather is constantly passed on to others for further elaboration. 
His text evaluates how basic elements of remix were already at play in the theories of 
Flusser and are more than evident in the way creative production is at play in the time 
of telematics. Kembrew McLeod’s “An Oral History of Sampling: From Turntables to 
Mashups” is a textual collage consisting of quotes by DJs, musicians, and artists taken 
from his published research. His essay explores the complex process of creativity and 
intellectual property; it puts into practice the multilayered issues at play in the act of 
sampling music. The quotes are by some of the most important figures in the history of 
R&B and hip hop. The excerpts range from basic creativity to whether or not sampling 
is a justified act that should be paid for. Cicero Inacio da Silva’s “Can I Borrow Your 
Proper Name? Remixing Signatures and the Contemporary Author” revisits the concept 
of the author as theorized by Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, and Michel Foucault 
among others in order to reflect on how remix is dependent on assumptions of author -
ship being integral to the process of recombination. Remix is a ripe space where the role 
of the author has been questioned, as da Silva explains, and for this reason he offers a 
detailed analysis of how authorship and remix are intertwined and develop meaning that 
constantly appears to deconstruct itself. He repositions and revitalizes remixing as a 
paradoxical complement to authorship.
Margie Borschke evaluates the limitations of remix. Her text “The Extended Remix: 
Rhetoric and History” argues that remix has been contextualized within a specific and 
limited framework that makes it specific to digital culture. Borschke reviews the rela -
tionship of analog to digital recordings and how their material differences are part of a 
complex practice that goes well beyond a narrow understanding of remix as something 
that is relatively new. She particularly takes on the arguments of Lawrence Lessig to 
question assumptions of a specific type of progress that appears to be concerned with the 
“new” which is proposed as a means to recover basic acts of creativity that, in the past, 
were considered “natural.” Eduardo Navas closes the part with “Culture and Remix: A 
Theory on Cultural Sublation.” Navas looks at different definitions of the term culture  
5
INTRODUCTIONto evaluate its relation to the act of remixing in historical terms. He explains that the 
reason our awareness of remix has emerged in recent times is due to the overlapping of 
two layers of cultural production that introduce and recycle material we produce. His 
text aims to shed light on how and why the assimilation of new material appears to be 
an inevitable process.
Many of the texts above certainly cross over in interests and share questions that 
make a case for a historical understanding of remix. Many, if not most, chapters also 
contradict each other or take on divergent views on the history of remix: where it comes 
from and where it may be going. This first part serves as a precedent to the multilayered 
contextual collage that is evident in the parts that follow.
Part II: Aesthetics
This part is concerned with the production and 
reception of remix in visual culture. How the aes -
thetics of diverse communities influence remix is 
a key area of exploration, as is the question of 
whether or not remix can be considered an art 
form in its own right, or if it is merely derivative 
of other fields of artistic practice. Consequently, 
issues of specialization, and the crossover from 
one creative field to another are central to gain -
ing a sense of the type of aesthetics that have developed in relation to the act of remix -
ing. How remix may play a role in redefining our basic experiences is a key issue among 
chapter contributions.
Lev Manovich, in his essay “Remix Strategies in Social Media,” takes a systematic, 
yet sprawling survey of remix and software and the growth of social media. Manovich 
focuses on how software is linked to creative and social production. In effect, he evalu -
ates the shifts in an ever-evolving global landscape during which he develops the key 
question: “What is media after software?”—especially when considering social network -
ing and media sharing. Nicola Maria Dusi’s “Mixing Movies and Trailers Before and after 
the Digital Age,” surveys several video mashups known as “sweded videos.” These are 
videos shot mainly by fans who recreate key scenes from selected films. Dusi implements 
a semiotic reading in order to take assessment of the evolution of sweded trailers and 
films particularly during the rise of YouTube, which has enabled the sharing of fan pro -
duced material. Erandy Vergara, in her chapter, “Remixing the Plague of Images: Video 
Art From Latin America in a Transnational Context” makes a direct connection 
between creative strategies explored by remixing as understood in music and video reed -
iting. Vergara examines the artworks of four Latin American artists to illustrate the 
internationalization of remix as a form of creative discourse that can be used for diver -
gent creative purposes. She sees the videos as metacommentaries on remix itself that 
also expose the bombardment of images on a global level. In effect, Vergara’s analysis 
provides insight to the complex politics of creative production in Latin American cul -
ture and beyond.
Tashima Thomas’s essay “Race and Remix: The Aesthetics of Race in the Visual and 
Performing Arts” provides an in-depth postcolonial reading on casta paintings, Carmen 
Miranda, and the film Pirates of the Caribbean . Thomas implements a critical reading of 
race using remix as a theoretical framework for her three case studies, which she dubs as Practice part contributions 
that relate to the Aesthetics  
part include Chapter 31  
by Gustavo Romano and  
Chapter 32  by Jonah Brucker-  
Cohen.
6
E. NA VAS ET AL.the Casta Grandmaster Remix, The Banana Remix, and the Monster Mash Remix, 
respectively. The result is the exposition of postcolonial conflicts that at first glance may 
appear to be part of the past, but as Thomas makes clear, are still quite prevalent in 
contemporary media representation of race and specifically blackness. Monica Tavares’s 
“Digital Poetics and Remix Culture: From the Artisanal Image to the Immaterial Image” 
explains the process of remixing according to three cultural stages: the preindustrial, the 
industrial, and the post-industrial. These three stages are respectively linked to three 
forms of production: the artisanal, the technical, and the technological. Tavares argues 
that contemporary culture functions under a type of metaproduction that is character -
istic of remix culture, and which is closely informed by material potentialities of digital 
media. Roy Christopher’s chapter “The End of an Aura: Nostalgia, Memory, and the 
Haunting of Hip Hop” deals with the question of memory in a time of digital mass 
reproducibility. His inquiry is realized as an actual literary critical performance. 
Christopher’s text by and large comprises a series of quotes by divergent authors, ranging 
from cyberpunk to hip hop, which take the shape of an intertextual collage that turns 
into a case study of authenticity in the time of constant digital reproduction. Byron 
Russell’s “Appropriation Is Activism” is an exploration of the possibilities of the critical 
remix. Russell establishes a remix as distinct from its sources, new, and therefore origi -
nal. He then argues that the critical remix emerges as a metagenre within remix itself. 
Critical remix for Russell can serve as a pivotal space to explore the connection between 
creativity and its politics in direct relation to the politics of culture at large. This poten -
tial of the political remix is what Russell finds promising for the future of creative 
production.
The texts in this part range from the evaluation of the cultural importance of software 
to issues of race and ethnicity, as well as the politics of aesthetics as part of remix and 
beyond. Some of the chapters delve deep into history and politics, which makes it more 
than evident that a few of them would also fit or complement texts in other parts of this 
volume. In effect, this clarifies how evaluating remix—even with a focused lens such as 
aesthetics—cannot be approached with a particular and narrow research methodology. 
Remix demands an interdisciplinary approach to its articulation.
Part III: Ethics
This part is concerned with ethical issues in remix 
culture. Issues such as those surrounding the 
unauthorized appropriation and reuse of copy -
righted content by remixers, whether or not con -
tent producers should make their work available 
for universal reuse, and the changing concepts of 
privacy and freedom of expression in the face of 
increasing cultural protectionism are explored in 
an attempt to present a balanced perspective on 
remix culture. In framing these issues, questions related to authorship, copyright, origi -
nality, and the changing nature of audiences in the production/consumption dichotomy 
are considered, establishing the role of ethics in remix.
Aram Sinnreich’s “The Emerging Ethics of Networked Culture” reflects upon the 
relationship between ethics and configurability. Sinnreich sees the definition of ethics 
as a challenge to take head-on in a time when extremists may propose that nothing has Practice part contributions 
that relate to the Ethics part 
include Chapter 34  by xtine 
burrough and Emily Erickson,  
Chapter 35  by Desiree D’Aless -
andro, and Chapter 38  by 
Eric S. Faden.
7
INTRODUCTIONchanged , or that everything is different . As opposed to imposing an a priori view of ethics, 
he decides to observe how ethics are practiced in configurable culture by its participants. 
He accomplishes this with an evaluation of a set of surveys that expose how complex 
attitudes appear to be emerging in configurable culture, and how gender, ethnicity, and 
class inform ethical decisions. Mette Birk, in her chapter “The Panopticon of Ethical 
Video Remix Practice,” similarly to Sinnreich, also looks at the attitude toward redistri -
bution of remixed production. Birk distributed a survey that, she argues, makes evident 
how people appear to self-impose particular attitudes and views on creativity in relation 
to the reuse or repurposing of someone else’s creative material. Birk references the work 
of Michel Foucault to make sense of this apparent attitude. She deliberately refrains 
from recommending a possible “best practice” for creative production, and leaves the 
reader to ponder the many questions her findings reveal. Janneke Adema’s “Cutting 
Scholarship Together/Apart: Rethinking the Political-Economy of Scholarly Book 
Publishing” is a direct reflection on the act of cutting and remix in relation to the com -
plexity of authorship and the future of the book. Adema redefines cutting in order to 
propose an alternative approach to the economy of the scholarly book; one that would 
be more open to real ethical change while also acknowledging its shortcomings. She 
considers her contribution a performative text: the actual result of the very frictions she 
sets out to examine. Patricia Aufderheide’s “Copyright and Fair Use in Remix: From 
Alarmism to Action” demystifies some of the assumptions about YouTube’s practice of 
video take-downs. She explains that in reality there actually is minimal prosecution of 
people who upload material that corporations consider infringement of their copyright. 
What actually takes place quite often, Aufderheide argues, is self-censorship due to lack 
of knowledge of fair use by YouTube users. To shed light on these issues Aufderheide 
offers two case studies that demonstrate how users can strengthen their understanding 
of copyright laws to exercise their rights, while also functioning under copyright law as 
defined.
Katharina Freund looks at the history and ever-evolving idiosyncrasies of vidding in 
her essay “I Thought I Made A Vid, But Then You Told Me That I Didn’t: Aesthetics 
and Boundary Work in the Fan Vidding Community.” Freund’s pivotal event and point 
of reference is the 2009 VividCon Convention (Chicago), which she uses as a starting 
point to reflect on how the vidding community shares aesthetics and ethics that in the 
past were practiced by a few who would convene periodically. She notes that such a 
tradition has moved on to become networked via the Internet, and evaluates the impli -
cations that this reality brings to a group who, in the past, has demonstrated insular 
tendencies. To make sense of the complexity of such a shared culture, Freund reviews 
the early history of vidding, and how it changed drastically due to the uploads of vids to 
YouTube, leading to contentions that remain unresolved. John Logie revisits assump -
tions of authorship in his chapter “Peeling the Layers of the Onion: Authorship in 
Mashup and Remix Cultures.” He provides a detailed analysis of “No Fun/Push It” cred -
ited to the duo 2 Many DJ’s; a mashup of two compositions under the same names by 
The Stooges and Salt-n-Pepa respectively. Logie traces in detail the many “authors” that 
contributed to the songs and the eventual mashup, which initially may appear to consist 
of three authorial figures, but when examined more closely a Pandora’s box opens, and 
a compelling case for a better understanding of how creativity is much more complex 
becomes more than evident, because the production of such songs is the result of a mul -
tilayered network of citations. Mark Amerika takes on himself in “remixthecontext (A 
Theoretical Fiction).” In this metafictional text Amerika questions the ethical 
8
E. NA VAS ET AL.relationship of the author and the publisher. He literally remixes selections of his previ -
ous reflections to deconstruct the limitations and ongoing negotiations of copyright 
granted by publishers to authors who agree to release their creative material with them. 
The result is a self-reflexive text that puts into practice the very issues that are in effect 
currently across the arts, and particularly, in his case, literary practice.
As it is evident in other parts, the Ethics part is diverse in the approaches that con -
tributors implement to reflect on the ethics of remix. Some contributors take a distanced 
approach by making use of surveys with a clear position as detached researchers, who 
may share some insiderism with the culture they analyze, while others immerse them -
selves fully into the subject of analysis—their writing becomes part of, if not the very 
subject of, analysis. It is this fluttering between being inside or outside of culture that 
makes the chapters in this part rich subjects worthy of careful contemplation in direct 
relation to the foundations of an ethical practice.
Part IV: Politics
This part is concerned with the role of remix as 
a techno-political tool of media activism. It 
explores the extent to which remix may be con -
sidered effective in the service of various social 
and political causes. Remix is a contemporary 
practice enabled by the convergence of digital 
networking technologies, the affordability of 
digital media production and distribution tools, 
and the proliferation of access to ever-expanding 
online archives of spreadable digital media  
content. The convergence of such factors has resulted in an unprecedented democra -
tization of the tools and techniques previously available to an exclusive minority of 
well-funded producers. Contributions explore the shifting balance of power in the 
contemporary media landscape and consider the implications of the remixer’s increas -
ing potential to reach audiences of millions with political messages. They also  
evaluate how such potential is in the process of being co-opted by the very system that 
remixers, invested in critical practice, aim to reshape.
Rachel O’Dwyer, in her contribution “A Capital Remix,” evaluates how strategies of 
remix as an act of resistance are in fact being used by corporations for profit. O’Dwyer 
outlines such processes by reviewing the history and theory that shapes how the term is 
currently understood. She argues that material used to create remixes is artificially made 
scarce by way of copyright laws, which then place actual remixes in a similar position to 
goods for which people would compete. O’Dwyer then takes apart the cultural frictions 
that this artificial scarcity creates for the practice of remix. Paolo Peverini’s “Remix 
Practices and Activism: A Semiotic Analysis of Creative Dissent” applies a semiotic 
reading to video mashups. Peverini approaches audiovisual works as texts which can be 
understood in depth as a complex system of communication. He first defines remix in 
terms of semiotics then applies his theory to two case studies, which are the campaigns 
of Greenpeace and Wikileaks. With these examples Peverini aims to demonstrate how 
the hybrid production found in remix practice is increasingly aimed at not only address -
ing but also engaging the receiver as a proactive thinker. Olivia Conti’s “Political Remix 
Video as a Vernacular Discourse” explores the relation between video mashups that take Practice part contributions that 
relate to the Politics part 
include Chapter 30  by Tom 
Tenney, Chapter 36  by Owen 
Gallagher, Chapter 37  by Elisa 
Kreisinger, and Chapter 39  by 
Diran Lyons.
9
INTRODUCTIONon political issues. Conti evaluates how the vernacular is at play in remixes. Semiotics 
is the methodology of choice to examine how meaning in video mashups is comprised 
of multiple layers that may contradict while also deepening the understanding of the 
mashups themselves. In “Locative Media as Remix” Conor McGarrigle discusses how 
privacy is changing in the era of GPS technology. McGarrigle views the rise of locative 
data with the potential to be used for “data-powered critique.” To make sense of this 
potential his reflection on data and privacy is developed with an awareness of issues of 
surveillance raised by the case of Edward Snowden. McGarrigle looks at the early pro -
duction of locative media that utilized the technology to propose a critical practice that 
may at this point be more relevant than ever to be able to work proactively within the 
current system of constant tracking.
J. Meryl Krieger, in her chapter “The Politics of John Lennon’s “Imagine”: 
Contextualizing the Roles of Mashups and New Media in Political Protest” analyses a 
mashup of John Lennon and Occupy with the Arab Spring. Krieger argues that there is 
a lack of rigorous analysis of the relation between remixes and mashups as they intersect 
in political activism—specifically protest movements. To reify her case she provides an 
in-depth analysis of John Lennon’s “Imagine” in protest movements prior to the age of 
YouTube, and then explains how the history of protest and the song by Lennon culmi -
nate in the mashup “Imagine This.” Krieger’s interest is to shift the tendency to consider 
mashups and remixes as static objects to viewing them as ongoing subjects of discourse 
that contribute to day-to-day political activism. Nadine Wanono’s “ Détournement as a 
Premise of the Remix from Political, Aesthetic, and Technical Perspectives” reflects 
upon the history and legacy of the Situationist International in direct juxtaposition to 
remix practices. This essay is in part personal reflection as Wanono worked closely with 
Jean Rouch, a French intellectual and educator who was largely connected to and 
inspired by the works of the Situationists. Wanono provides a brief and concise history 
of the concept détournement  to explain how its principles are quite relevant to the way 
new media and remix emerged and currently function. Her contribution makes eloquent 
connections between code, activism, scholarly research, and remix in all its forms. 
Rachel Falconer recontextualizes the polymath as a remixer in her chapter, “The New 
Polymath (Remixing Knowledge).” A polymath is a person who is adroit at several tasks 
and/or fields of production. Falconer traces the history of the polymath and makes a 
compelling case for it to be seen as a “DJ of thought” who is critically conscious of the 
many challenges that networked culture presents. Falconer develops a critical model for 
the cultural producer of the future who will be constantly tested in various operational 
spaces.
The chapters in this part are quite diverse in their focus, yet they share a clear urgency 
in understanding how a critical practice is needed in order for remixers to be effective 
contributors to the global culture emerging during the first half of the twenty-first cen -
tury. The texts fit multiple themes, continuing to demonstrate how remix demands a 
constant questioning of itself—so that its subversion by the very system it aims to cri -
tique is not successful.
Part V: Practice
This part offers chapters written by remix practitioners. The authors—often artists or 
remix practitioners themselves—include their first-person stories about festivals, exhib -
its, music productions, and video mashups, as well as performances and installations. 
10
E. NA VAS ET AL.Contributors range from event organizers and video artists to interdisciplinary activists 
who thrive on the threshold of various disciplines. Many of the contributions, particu -
larly the last few, tend to focus on video mashups. This emphasis should be considered 
representational of the overall prevalence of mashups in remix culture. Remix may have 
started in music—and much of the most polemical and popularized contestation of copy -
right may be found there due to the stakes major corporations have on intellectual 
property, but it is in video remixes where one can find the seeds of pervasive resistance—
that is specifically and deliberately self-reflexive of the limitations of the very product 
that such mashups share. This defines the overall contextualization of remix throughout 
this volume. It is this context that informs the works discussed by the practitioners 
contributing to this part.
Tom Tenney, director of The RE/Mixed Media Festival, in his chapter “Crises of 
Meaning in Communities of Creative Appropriation: A Case Study of the 2010 RE/Mixed 
Media Festival” shares his experience in organizing the multidisciplinary event which has 
taken place successfully for more than four years. Tenney discusses his early influences and 
how they came to shape his attitude toward the practice of remixing. He also elaborates 
on the challenges and achievements of The RE/Mixed Media Festival in relation to bigger 
questions of the future of creativity and the politics of copyright. Tenney’s contribution is 
a testament to the complex process that collaborative projects demand of organizers who 
often have to develop many skills to make several elements function together to succeed 
in producing a large festival. Gustavo Romano, in his chapter “Of Re/appropriations ,” pro -
vides a theoretical and personal account of the process of curating the exhibit titled Re/
appropriations , for the MEIAC museum in Badajoz, Spain. The artworks included in the 
exhibit are also archived as part of the museum’s online database known as NETescopio. 
Romano shares his definition of remix to explain how he used it to curate the exhibition. 
His essay is an entry point into an interdisciplinary practice, which brings together the 
roles of artist and curator: a necessary combination in the field of new media, given that, 
to this day, the field does not have enough curators to do justice to the ever-increasing 
production by emerging new media artists—particularly those who rely heavily on remix 
practices. Jonah Brucker-Cohen discusses the limitations of current interface design, and 
its potential in “Aesthetics of Remix: Networked Interactive Objects and Interface 
Design.” He discusses selected projects of his own and others to demonstrate the potential 
of remix as an attitude in the production of software in order to enhance the possibilities 
of user interfaces. His research in effect opens a space to reflect on the aesthetics of soft -
ware in an evidently emerging hybrid culture.
In Nate Harrison’s chapter, “Reflections on the Amen Break: A Continued History, 
an Unsettled Ethics,” the author shares his own experience of having his metacommen -
tary, a brief documentary on the history of the Amen Break, become remixed into actual 
music tracks, as well as being potentially plagiarized in an article by a major online 
publication. Harrison’s account makes a strong case for the creative process to be deemed 
as an ongoing fragmentation that can only attain meaning when it is shared, shaped, 
and reshaped by participants in a cultural space. xtine burrough and Emily Erickson 
share their collaboration—“Let’s Go Crazy” video activism on YouTube—between bur -
rough’s new media production and Erickson’s media law classrooms, in their chapter 
“Going Crazy with Remix: A Classroom Study by Practice via Lenz v. Universal .” The 
student-created remixes of Lenz’s dancing baby video created a platform for students to 
interact directly with Stephanie Lenz (of Lenz v. Universal ) while learning about remix, 
appropriation, copyright, and fair use. Desiree D’Alessandro, in her chapter “A Remix 
11
INTRODUCTIONArtist and Advocate” describes selected video mashups she produced during the last few 
years to share how she confronted copyright infringement allegations at the university 
where she was pursuing a master’s degree. D’Alessandro uses her own experience as an 
entry point to reflect on the politics of remix in terms of remix culture, as defined by 
Lawrence Lessig and the premise of free culture as defined by Creative Commons. Owen 
Gallagher’s chapter “Occupy/Band Aid Mashup: ‘Do They Know It’s Christmas?’  ” 
reflects on his own practice as a producer of critical remix videos (CRV), focusing on 
his CRV “Occupy/Band Aid Mashup” as a case study. In his analysis, Gallagher considers 
the contrast between Western and Middle Eastern media representations of the Occupy 
movement and the Arab Spring uprisings, against a backdrop of cultural obsession in 
relation to which song will be the Christmas number one in the music charts. Gallagher 
argues that CRVs represent an authentic opportunity for activist remixers to have their 
voices heard on a global stage, utilizing the full potential of digital networking and 
mobile technologies, as well as spreadable media content and online distribution 
platforms.
Elisa Kreisinger’s essay “Remixing the Remix” is a self-reflexive account of her pro -
duction of “Queer Carrie,” and other Sex and The City  video mashups, along with “Don 
Loves Roger,” a video remix of Mad Men . Kreisinger makes use of queer theory and femi -
nist practice as a means to open a space for debate in which the representation of diverse 
cultures that may appear on the fringes is noted as elemental, and necessary for a promis -
ing development of diversity in culture as a whole. Eric S. Faden’s “A Fair(y) Use Tale” 
explains how he and undergraduate students at Bucknell University remixed footage 
from Walt Disney cartoons, to create a critical commentary on copyright and fair use. 
Faden shares in great detail how and why he was never sued by the Walt Disney 
Company, and why up to the time of this publication he and his students still experience 
freedom of expression. In his case study “An Aesthetics of Deception in Political Remix 
Video” Diran Lyons discusses the principles of political remix and how he contributes 
to this tradition. Lyons discusses his creative production for selected video mashups that 
comment on the politics of George Bush, John McCain, Mitt Romney, and Barack 
Obama. The remixer holds a stern position against all politicians who profess empty 
slogans of major paradigm shifts, whether they are Republicans or Democrats alike.
“Radical Remix: Manifestoon ” by Jesse Drew is a remix of US-produced cartoons 
remixed to support a voice-over narrative of Marx and Engels’s The Communist Manifesto . 
Drew produced the video mashup under the tradition of political remix as a critical 
commentary and reflection on the politics after the fall of the Soviet Union. As Drew 
explains, he was quite surprised how relevant words written in the nineteenth century 
sounded in the 1990s. In his essay Drew also shares the unexpected viewership and 
worldwide recognition Manifestoon  received once it was uploaded to YouTube by an 
anonymous person without his permission. Kevin Atherton’s “ In Two Minds ” is a critical 
reflection on the remixing of a 1978 performance more than 30 years later, in 2014. 
Atherton performed himself having a discussion with footage of himself from 1978. The 
first time he performed this piece in 2013, he realized that the concept of conversing 
with footage from decades back in front of an audience was a rich ephemeral experience 
full of potential for the reflection on issues of original experiences and their recontex -
tualization into the future. This was possible, as Atherton explains, because unlike most 
performances in the Seventies, his was documented. In a sense, Atherton touches on 
the richness of the recorded object in similar fashion to DJs who realized that there is 
great potential in the creative mix of a record, and even more in its remix.
12
E. NA VAS ET AL.Not surprisingly, the chapters included in the Practice part demonstrate a wide range 
of diversity. Many of them would complement the other themes included in this book 
(in fact some are mentioned in chapters blanketed beneath other themes), thus illustrat -
ing that remix remains an interdisciplinary practice among divergent cultural producers 
from a variety of scholarly and/or production backgrounds. We hope readers will notice 
how the artists and producers included in this part put into action the many ideas dis -
cussed and theorized in the other four areas (History, Aesthetics, Ethics, and Politics) of 
the book. Toward this goal, we have included notes in the sidebar throughout the text 
to indicate where themes that arise in the first four parts are further articulated, from a 
practitioner’s point of view, in the Practice area of the text.
While this manuscript is in no way conclusive on the nature of remix studies—we 
considered other themes and certainly there are new themes that emerge each year—our 
goal is to create a baseline anthology for students, practitioners, and digitally empowered 
citizens interested in remix to understand it as a discourse and practice. We hope you 
will join us online at remixstudies.com and continue to develop this important area of 
research, practice, and online communication.
Part I
HISTORY
This page intentionally left blank
1
REMIX AND THE 
DIALOGIC ENGINE OF 
CULTURE
A Model for Generative 
Combinatoriality
Martin Irvine
Is the cliché “everything is a Remix” more than trivially true? The terms Remix, appro -
priation, sampling, and mashup are used so generally, in so many contexts, and at differ -
ent levels of description that they don’t provide a useful vocabulary for explanation.1 
“Remix” has become a convenient metaphor for a mode of production assumed (incor -
rectly) to be specific to our post-postmodern era and media technologies (though with 
some earlier “precursors”), and usually limited to describing features of cultural artifacts 
as “outputs” of software processes (especially in music, video, and photography). “Remix” 
and related terms are used for genres and techniques of composition  (collage, assemblage, 
music Remix, appropriation), artistic practices  (with a variety of self-reflexive, performa -
tive, and critical strategies), media and technol -
ogy hybridization (new combinations of software 
functions, interfaces, and hardware implementa -
tions), and cultural processes  (ongoing reinterpre -
tation, repurposing, and global cross-cultural 
hybridization).2 What connects all these manifes -
tations of Remix, hybridity, and creative combi -
natoriality? What else is “Remix” telling us if we 
open up the cultural black box?
Riffing on the great, often-referenced, soul album by Marvin Gaye, What’s Going On 
(1971), we can say that there’s always been a “deep Remix” going on at multiple levels 
simultaneously, and we need to find ways of bringing these ordinarily unconscious and 
ubiquitous processes up for awareness and description.3 “Remix” in all of its manifesta -
tions needs to be turned inside out, reverse engineered, and de-black-boxed, so that it 
can reveal the dynamic, generative processes that make new (re)combinatorial expres -
sions in any medium possible , understandable , and necessary .See Chapter 33  for Nate 
Harrison’s “de-black-boxed” 
discussion of the Amen Break 
as it relates to Remix practice 
and culture.
16
M. IRVINEWorking toward this end, I will introduce a new synoptic view of concepts and 
research approaches for a more complete description of the generative dialogic principles  
behind Remix and all forms of hybrid combinatoriality. I will demonstrate how Remix, 
appropriation, and hybrid works implement the same normative  processes that enable 
combinatoriality in all expression and are not special cases requiring genre- or medium-
specific justification. Making these foundational processes understandable allows us to 
reposition Remix and hybrid works in the living continuum of culture, thus enabling 
this creative principle to do much more important critical work for us in an era of 
intense debates about the status of authors, artists, individual works, the cultural archive, 
intellectual property, and common culture.
My de-black-boxing of “Remix” draws from an interdisciplinary knowledge base with 
extensible methods for revealing how all works in a culture are necessarily constituted 
in ongoing dialogic chains and networks. The approach that I develop here expands on 
the concept of dialogism from Bakhtin, socio- and cognitive linguistics, generative mod -
els of meaning-making ( semiosis ) from Peircean foundations in semiotics and recent 
interdisciplinary work, and the generative-combinatorial-recursive models of language 
and symbolic cognition from linguistics and the cognitive sciences.4
Of course, all these fields have extensive bibliographies and complex histories of 
research and debate, and any summary of common areas of interest will risk eliding over 
intra- and interdisciplinary disputes and disagreements. I will only be able to outline a 
conceptual map of this interdisciplinary terrain here, and suggest some ways to mobilize 
these combined resources for new research. My approach is motivated by two central 
questions: (1) what makes dialogic, combinatorial expressions in any symbolic form 
possible , meaningful , and necessary  in living cultures, and (2) how can we develop a fuller 
description of the generative-creative principles underlying Remix and hybrid works for 
more compelling arguments in the context of current debates?
An Overview of the Conceptual Repertoire:  
Meaning Generation, Dialogism, Combinatoriality, and Recursion
The idea of culture as a process of reinterpreting and reusing inherited resources has often 
been noted and emphasized by many recent scholars:5 “[C]ulture is a complex process of 
sharing and signification. Meanings are exchanged, adopted, and adapted through acts of 
communication—acts that come into conflict with intellectual property law.”6
Although the general concept of new cultural expressions created in a continuum of 
interpretive responses is well recognized, the underlying normative and necessary gen -
erative principles for cultural expression remain vaguely understood and poorly defined.
The question of generativity  in culture was usefully defined by Yuri Lotman, the 
founder of an important school of thought in cultural semiotics:
The main question of semiotics of culture is the problem of meaning genera -
tion. What we shall call meaning generation is the ability both of culture as a 
whole and of its parts to put out, in the “output,” nontrivial new texts. New 
texts are the texts that emerge as results of irreversible processes  . . . , i.e. texts 
that are unpredictable.7
“Texts,” of course, designate any form of organized symbolic expression, and “nontrivial 
new texts” are those emerging from the generative dialogic process (nonrepetitive 
17
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREexpression), expressions in any medium that expand into other networks of meaning in 
unanticipated ways.8
Finding adequate ways to describe the generative processes behind all the observable  
features of expression in a culture is difficult because we can’t catch ourselves in  
the routine and spontaneous process of making meaningful expressions because we pro -
duce them unconsciously and non-self-reflexively. Just as we are ordinarily unaware of 
the grammatical, semantic, and pragmatic rules and codes that allow us to generate new 
expressions in unforeseen new contexts of meaning in our own native language, “Remix” 
in all of its forms sits on top of ongoing, generative, dialogic, and combinatorial pro -
cesses that make all our symbolic systems from language to multimedia possible but 
unobservable  during the process of expression and understanding itself. We have to 
reverse-engineer the observable outputs and de-black-box the meaning processes that 
made the expressions possible.
The underlying dialogic and intersubjective processes are not visible as features  of 
expressions because they form the grounds of their possibility per se. Consequently, we 
cannot account for how and why Remix and explicit combinatorial forms of expression 
are as recurrent, meaningful, and prominent as they are by merely describing observable, 
surface features (e.g., instances of expressions with “sources”). Thinking of relations 
among cultural expressions and artifacts in terms of itemizable sources usually devolves 
into making inventories of “originals,” “copies,” and “derivations.” Works become rei -
fied, productized totalities, outputs from cultural-technical black boxes with prepro -
grammed ownership labels.
Participating in this “sources and derivations” discourse, with the level of description 
it imposes as natural and obvious, is a form of what Pierre Bourdieu has termed “collec -
tive misrecognition.”9 We are continually socialized into maintaining—under heavy 
ideological pressure—ways of preserving the misrecognition  of sources, authors, origins, 
works, and derivations in order to sustain these social  categories as functions  in the politi -
cal economy and the intellectual property legal regime for cultural goods.10 We need to 
pry all this loose, breaking the cycle of misrecognition, with a different concept base for 
more useful levels of description and analysis.
A Generative Model of Meaning-Making
For all the meanings we use in seemingly transparent ways every day, our symbolic facul -
ties use parallel architectures of rules and procedures for combining components into 
meaningful wholes. To understand the necessary processes in these combinatorial  
structures we need to start from an extensible  model of meaning that usefully holds for 
descriptions across symbolic systems (like language, images, and musical sounds in their 
multiple genre-specific combinations). Students in the humanities and social sciences 
are familiar with the French poststructuralist schools of thought that work from 
Ferdinand de Saussure’s model of signification,11 but a far more productive model is 
provided by C. S. Peirce. Peirce’s model for the generative meaning-making process, 
which he termed semiosis  (symbolic productivity), continues to provide new insights in 
many fields of research.12
Peirce’s specialized terms are often a barrier to appreciating what he was figuring out, 
and I’ll only point out some top-level terms and concepts important for this chapter. 
Throughout his career, Peirce sought out ways to describe his key insights about sym -
bolic productivity as a dynamic activity depending on simultaneously perceptible, 
18
M. IRVINEcognitive, dialogic, pragmatic, and intersubjective functions.13 He zeroed in on the cen -
tral problem of symbolic thought, meaning-making, and conceptual knowledge with a 
model that unifies production, creation, encoding, or expression (from the side of mean -
ing generation) with interpretation, reception, or decoding (from the side of meaning 
understanding).
Early in his career, Peirce discovered that a sign is “something by knowing which we 
know something more,”14 and that meaning cannot be “in” anything but can only be 
explained as an ongoing cognitive activity  or process (semiosis ) activated by human sub -
jects connected by collective uses of symbols. Human symbol systems—from language 
and mathematics to pictorial images or musical sounds—incorporate a structure and a 
process enabling anyone to think with others and form nodes of cognitive relations in 
concepts that always seek completion in further relations. Meaning and learning are 
thus closely related in our dependence on intersubjective symbolic-conceptual steps that 
develop through and in time:15
Thought  . . . is in itself essentially of the nature of a sign. But a sign is not a sign 
unless it translates itself into another sign in which it is more fully devel -
oped  . . . . Thought must live and grow in incessant new and higher transla -
tions, or it proves itself not to be genuine thought.16
Symbols grow. They come into being by development out of other signs  . . . We 
think only in signs  . . . A symbol, once in being, spreads among the peoples. In 
use and in experience, its meaning grows.17
What are the consequences, then, if thought and meaning are symbolic processes con -
tinually emerging through time and always embodied in material-symbolic form? In 
Peirce’s primary elucidation of meaning-making, “the meaning of a sign is the sign it has 
to be translated into.”18 Meanings “grow” in a recursive process in the sense that from 
one state of symbolic representations we develop higher or more inclusive concepts that 
can only be expressed or represented in further signs.19
By redefining human symbolic activity ( semiosis , meaning productivity) in a contin -
uum of collective uses and interpretations over time, we find that meanings are what 
someone does or activates  by participating as a semiotic agent in a social-cognitive posi -
tion with others (through conversation, writing, music, artworks, any shared cultural 
genre). Expressions and cultural artifacts can only function as meaningful, and recogniz -
able as such, in intersubjective  activity that connects expressions understood (past or 
prior cognition symbolically realized) to meanings developed in further symbolic com -
binations (connecting and projecting meanings toward future cognition and ongoing 
meaning-making).
Peirce’s key insight was combining the standing-for  relation in the symbolic structure 
with generative sequences of intersubjective symbolic cognition  as the ground of meaning: 
A sign, or representamen , is something that stands to somebody for something in some 
respect or capacity. It addresses somebody, that is, creates in the mind of that person an 
equivalent sign, or perhaps a more developed sign. That sign which it creates I call the 
interpretant  of the first sign.20 Meaning-vehicles like words, statements, images, and 
musical forms are used to convey meaning because they stand for  something interindi -
vidually cognitive, and only for (in relation to) a cognitive agent, a meaning subject, an 
interpreter in an interpretive community, who recognizes the kind of sign and its con -
ceptual symbolic possibilities (for example, the multiple ways that words, images, and 
19
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREmusical sound patterns invoke meanings for those in an interpretive community). 
Meaning-making can only happen through communally cognitive, intersubjective, rule-
governed processes unfolding in and through human lived time.
How we build or associate meanings from the standing-for  relation forms the third part 
of Peirce’s meaning triad, which he termed the interpretant  (that by means of which 
meaning or interpretability is disclosed), a cognitive step forming one node of relations 
in the unfolding development of meaning. In one of his well-known formulations of the 
model he states:
A sign stands for something to the idea which it produces, or modifies  . . . The 
meaning of a representation can be nothing but a representation  . . . . Finally, 
the interpretant is nothing but another representation to which the torch of 
truth is handed along; and as representation, it has its interpretant again. Lo, 
another infinite series.21
The conceptual networks ( interpretants ) activated through making meanings in symbolic 
relations are thus not privately in any one’s mind or in the perceptible properties  of sign vehi -
cles like the sounds of a language, written characters, or the visual information we perceive 
from images. Peirce observed that whenever we “get” a meaning, it is always representable 
or expressible in additional signs in ongoing sequences (even in individual thought). Peirce’s 
model of the ongoing development of meaning is known as infinite semiosis ; that is, meanings 
unfolding in open-ended, unlimited sequences and conceptual networks with interpretive 
paths that are unpredictable from any one state in time.22 The necessary structure of the 
symbolic process in human thought is thus always already dialogic, entailing interpretations 
of prior signs (an “input,” as it were, from prior structures of meaning), the “meaning” of 
which (a new subsequent “output” meaning structure, the “interpretant”) can only be 
expressed, represented, instantiated, or developed in further signs.
Translating Peirce’s concepts into our current vocabulary, we can say that symbolic 
forms of expression—like understood images or a movie narrative—are a medium or inter -
face for combining something individually perceptible  with something intersubjectively 
cognitive . Since we live collectively in and through time, symbolic expressions in all media 
sustain continuities in social, communicable states of thought. This necessary structure of 
meaning-making developing symbolically and socially in lived temporal contexts is the 
ground of possibility for all our meaning and communication systems: the symbolic func -
tion cascades out through the multiple orders of conceptualization we use every day from 
language and writing to visual media and software-produced artifacts ( Figure 1.1 ).
Emerging in recursive symbolic processes, meaning isn’t something reified or fixed in 
any one set of material-perceptible tokens (as expressions “in tangible form,” in the 
copyright definition). Expressible meaning develops in new interpretations unpredictable  
from the state of meanings realized at any one point in time. For Peirce, this recursive, 
future-directed continuum of meaning-making is dialogic :23 “All thinking is necessarily 
a sort of dialog, an appeal from the momentary self to the better considered self of the 
immediate and of the general future.”24
Thought is what it is only by virtue of its addressing a future thought which 
is . . . more developed. In this way, the existence of thought now depends on 
what is to be hereafter; so that it has only a potential existence, dependent on 
the future thought of the community.25
20
M. IRVINEAny cultural artifact thus forms a dense node in a network of symbolic relations and 
future-directed meanings in the semiosic continuum. Any work represents stored-  
and-forwarded semiosis, a momentarily resummed dialogic development of possible 
meanings interpretable in a community, meanings made  by instantiating continually 
additive interpretability. A cultural work is thus an interface to the cumulative deep 
Remix that makes it possible.
In the complex bundles of symbolic functions in contemporary genres and media 
forms, we see the emergent process of meaning generation unfolding countless times 
every day. A news show typically begins by interpreting sources of mediated information, 
and then the interpretive output—the news show—will be in the form of another medi -
ated representation in an open sequence. Further, using the codes of irony and parody, the 
whole genre of a news show and its framing of content can be reinterpreted like The 
Daily Show . New songs get released into the popular music stream every day, and musi -
cians in every genre are always tacitly saying, “yeah, yeah, we know all that (prior 
instances of the genre, prior ways they are taken to mean), it’s all in there, been there, 
done that; but what about this?” (the new piece, a new combinatorial expression that 
presupposes the already-expressed). We can catch ourselves in the daily, ordinary semi -
osic process every time we or others say, “in other words  . . . ”, “what he meant was  . . . ,” 
“that scene in the movie is so Hitchcockian,” “that song is riffing on The Beatles  . . . ”
So, the first steps toward uncovering the generative structure of meaning-making 
gives us an important, generalizable, productive law of semiosis: the interpretation Receiv ed cultural
expressions
[symbolic ar tifacts]Interpreted in
cultural momentsGenerat e ongoing s ymbolic
expression in in terpretive paths
Interpretants
[interpreted-expressib le
meanings]interpretant, ninterpretant, n
interpretant, n
TimeSemiosis [meaning-generation]Kinds of meaning
[concepts , values]Material-symbolic
forms
[interpretables]
Figure 1.1   Extending C. S. Peirce’s model of semiosis as a generative process (diagram 
courtesy of Martin Irvine)
21
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTURE(meaning) of a set of signs will always take the form of another set of signs . The “outputs” of 
meanings understood  become new “inputs” for further meaningful expressions  that, when 
received by others, align productively with other meaning nodes activated by other 
meaning agents in a culture. Meaning, writ large, is always Remix+: meaning emerges 
through a “Remix” of symbolically structured “inputs” restructured into further “outputs” 
with a “value-add,” a development of additional conceptual relations and contexts for 
other routes in a meaning network.
Generative Dialogism
Most artists, writers, and musicians know intuitively that they work from generative 
dialogic principles that enable new combinations and hybrid expressions in the genres 
that they work with. Herbie Hancock recently described the well-known dialogic 
hybridization in jazz in his own way:
The thing that keeps jazz alive, even if it’s under the radar, is that it is so free 
and so open to not only lend its influence to other genres, but to borrow and be 
influenced by other genres. That’s the way it breathes.26
Jazz has long been the paradigm of a generative art form based on responses to, and 
reinterpretations of, expressions by other musicians and ongoing fusion with other gen -
res, sounds, and traditions both in live performance and studio compositions.27 With its 
ever-accruing encyclopedia of music resources and intertextual relations, jazz exemplifies 
a form of practiced dialogism  that opens up the deeper underlying generative processes in 
other cultural forms. The concept of dialogism is essential for building an extensible 
model of interindividual meaning-making that also explains the necessity of linking new 
expressions to those of others and to prior expressions in the memory system formed by 
a culture’s accrued artifacts.28
Peirce redescribed meaning-making as a conceptual-dialogic process that necessarily 
projects prior interpretable meaning units into future-oriented interpretable meaning 
units. Bakhtin’s discovery is parallel to Peirce’s but emerged from analyzing expressions in 
social use, in living conversations and in dialog representing different voices and points of 
view in written genres. Bakhtin discovered that we are always referencing, assuming, quot -
ing, embedding, and responding to the expressions of others, whether in direct references 
or as a background of unexpressed presuppositions.29 Everything expressed in social situa -
tions and in larger cultural contexts is fundamentally grounded in otherness—others’ 
words and others as receivers of, and responders to, anything expressed. Anyone’s expres -
sion in speech and written genres is always inhabited by the words of others, other voices 
and other contexts in time or place, and others different in identity from one’s own:
When we select words in the process of constructing an utterance, we by  
no means always take them from the system of language in their neutral,  
dictionary  form. We usually take them from other utterances [author’s  
emphasis]  . . . Each utterance is filled with echoes and reverberations of other 
utterances to which it is related by the communality of the sphere of speech 
communication.  . . . Each utterance refutes, affirms, supplements, and relies 
on the others, presupposes them to be known, and somehow takes them into 
account.30
22
M. IRVINEIn Bakhtin’s terms, anything one says is always already hybrid and heteroglot (formed 
with “other[s’] speech”): both spoken and formal written genres always have otherness 
and others built in.
In Bakhtin’s key insight, the minimal unit of expression and meaning is the “dialo -
gized utterance,” an expression in a living context that necessarily emerges from a back -
ground of prior statements and anticipates other responses in a Janus-like structure of 
past and future, self and others. All forms of cultural expression have addressability  and 
answerability built in: expressions are simultaneously a response to, and an anticipation 
of, ongoing dialogic meaning. Living dialog is always “oriented toward a future answer-
word,” and the “already-spoken” anticipates a future response linked in reciprocal dia -
logic presupposition.31
The dialogic principle thus extends beyond local situations of expression to the con -
tinuum of reinterpretations in cultural forms through historical time (as also recognized 
by Peirce). Scaled up to the level of cultural genres, texts, and media artifacts, dialogism 
becomes intertextuality  and intermediality , that is, networks of expressions, prototypical 
works, encyclopedic cross-references, and genre types that presuppose and entail each 
other and provide the links for meanings in new combinatorial nodes.32 “Intertextuality” 
is often invoked less usefully for describing “borrowing,” “sources,” and “influences” in 
recognizable recurrences (features which are, again, surface indicators of deeper, presup -
posed relations), but intertextuality  and intermediality  have greater heuristic value for 
uncovering generative, dialogic processes.
The dialogic principle has also been productively developed for focused empirical 
research in sociolinguistics, discourse studies, and pragmatics, yielding a wealth of evi -
dence confirming Bakhtin’s central hypothesis.33 Deborah Tannen has done extensive 
research on “dialogicality” in everyday conversations: we always find repetition of 
phrases, reporting and embedding others’ speech, and ongoing intertextuality (speakers 
in conversations presupposing and referencing prior expressions outside the current 
frame of conversation).34 This kind of dialogism is a “spontaneous feature” in live dis -
course, and not (only) a feature of self-conscious literary forms. For conversations to be 
what we experience them to be, we necessarily “Remix” others’ words and phrases with 
our own to establish conversational continuities, mark social relations among speakers, 
negotiate meanings, and make responses that are open to further responses.
The conclusions from research in multiple fields show that the dialogic principle is a 
built-in constitutive feature already in place before  any specific language use or expres -
sion in other symbolic forms is possible. An individual person’s meanings, cognition, and 
expression require and presuppose a community of others : others’ expressions are neces -
sary as structured “inputs” that initiate and perpetuate participation as an intersubject 
with other members of a cultural community. In Lotman’s description, “the dialogic situ -
ation  [author’s emphasis], precedes both real dialog and even the existence of a language 
in which to conduct it: the semiotic situation precedes the instruments of semiosis.”35 
The dialogic principle is thus not an effect  or perceptible property  of discourse and sym -
bolic expression, but is a precondition  for its possibility per se.
Since all symbolic systems of expression are intersubjective, interindividual, collec -
tive, and other-implicated, we find that the dialogic principle and semiosis, as enacted 
and activated by people in cultural communities, are the “sources” of remixes, hybrid 
recombinations, and appropriations. Generative dialogism provides the environment, 
milieu, or medium of situated meaning transformations . The dialogic principle is the gen -
erative engine of culture, and all living cultures are always already dialogic. Dialogic 
23
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREhybridization is thus the default (always on) state of culture. There is no “there” there 
outside the dialogic network.
Generativity and Recursion
Generative and cognitive linguistics provide important models for explaining productiv -
ity and combinatoriality in language extensible to other symbolic systems. Any speaker 
in any language community can generate an unlimited (infinite) set of new expressions 
from the limited (finite) resources of the language.36 This principle is known as “discrete 
infinity,” the capacity for infinite (unlimited, open-ended) expression from finite means. 
Language is composed of formally discrete constituents (words and grammatical struc -
tures), but the possibilities for new combinations of words in new statements expressing 
new concepts in new contexts are unlimited. This productivity/creativity is possible 
because language is a system of symbolic functions  (words and phrases as tokens for 
abstract and generalizable concepts, not signals corresponding to unique entities) and 
rules for syntactic combinatoriality . Seeking ever simpler unifying principles for language, 
Noam Chomsky most recently uses the term “unbounded Merge ” as the unifying opera -
tion for rule-governed combinatoriality:37 “In its most elementary form, a generative 
system is based on an operation that takes structures already formed and combines them 
into a new structure. Call it Merge . Operating without bounds, Merge yields a discrete 
infinity of structured expressions.”38
Parallel principles for combining structures within structures are found in all symbolic 
systems, though not with a formal one-to-one mapping of features from language archi -
tectures to those in other systems.39
The ability to generate unlimited sequences of rule-governed combinatorial structures 
depends on recursion, which is now widely recognized as an essential cognitive capacity 
that unites language, memory, and all other forms of symbolic cognition and expres -
sion.40 The terms “recursion,” “recursive function,” and “recursive process/procedure” 
are used in several ways across the disciplines. In mathematics and algorithm theory, 
recursion is a logical design for looping a  function  (a software routine or process) by call -
ing ( invoking ) itself to use its outputs as new inputs in computable processes. Recursive 
routines are built into every software program we use (and all those running behind the 
scenes). In our context, we will use the concept of recursion in the specific senses devel -
oped in cognitive linguistics. Language, other sign systems, and memory in human cog -
nition depend on multiple kinds of recursion, both recursive processes and recursively 
applied rules.
Recent research in linguistics and cognitive science focuses extensively on recursion 
as a (if not the) defining feature of language in its architecture for enabling us to produce 
unlimited new combinations of statements of any length and for creating unlimited 
larger patterns of connected discourse.41 This productive field of research provides valu -
able analytical and empirical methods that can be extended to the study of other sym -
bolic systems in culture. As forms of rule-governed compositions, all genres of Remix 
and hybrid combinatorial works implement recursive processes and recursively applied 
rules from the larger symbolic systems of which they are part.
Pinker and Jackendoff sum up an accepted view in linguistics: “Recursion consists of 
embedding a constituent in a constituent of the same type, for example a relative clause 
inside a relative clause.”42 For example, any English speaker can nest phrases like “the 
boy who loved the girl who lived in a house that had a garden that had rabbits that ate 
24
M. IRVINEthe carrots that the girl planted that  . . . ” in open-ended grammatical structures limited 
only by the speech situation. (This means there can be no “longest sentence,” “longest 
narrative,” or “longest song” since we can always loop in another constituent of like 
form.) Likewise, any musician competent in a musical genre can expand a composition 
or performance by embedding new phrases of like form within the structures of a com -
position in unlimited ways. (As fans may either love or loathe, a jam band can play for 
hours.) From this underlying feature of recursively open combinatoriality in language, 
we can extrapolate a generalizable rule for expression in other symbolic forms: in the 
compositional structure of a form, embed a constituent (structure) within a constituent (struc -
ture) of the same type, repeat n number of times as expressive needs require . As we shall see, 
this generative rule describes recursive constituent embedding, nesting, or looping 
implemented in the structures of many cultural forms.
The recursive processes that enable symbolic cognition and rule-governed combina -
toriality are also the key processes behind dialogism. A syntactic recursive procedure 
explains how and why embedded combinations must always follow a rule for the “fit” of 
units within an expression (a structure fits a “slot,” a placeholder, within a like struc -
ture). However, a recursive procedure does not specify the source  of the “constituent of 
the same type” in open combinatorial structures. The generative processes enable speak -
ers/writers to combine units expressed as their “own” phrases within spontaneous dis -
course and/or as units representing embedded allusions, references, or quotations from 
other expression, recent or past, combined in the appropriate structural slots. Dialogism 
thus happens at an interface between the underlying formal generative-recursive pro -
cesses and the specific symbolic forms of cultural genres and their situated contexts of 
social use.
Since the structures for assuming, referencing, and quoting others’ and prior  
expression are built in, constitutive features of language as our primary intersubjective-
symbolic system, then it should be intuitively clear how these recursive quotational 
embedding functions are distributed in multiple levels through other equally dialogic 
symbolic systems like music, written genres, film, and the visual arts. We use the recur -
sive embedding function in forms we see every day: embedding “others’ expression” as 
quotations, citations, or references in conversation and written genres (first-order dialo -
gism), inserting appropriated “sources” in a genre of assemblage or collage within the 
genre’s compositional structures, using quoted or sampled musical “constituent” units 
combined in the structures of a musical piece (e.g., as foregrounded in compositions 
developed with software enabled rerecording methods). We can generate unlimited 
combinations of meaning structures through the formal processes of syntactic recursion, 
and the dialogic principle explains what drives or motivates necessarily combinatorial 
expressions as the situated, ongoing meanings  produced by members of a culture.43
Recursion is thus a unifying principle for the analysis of symbolic processes and expres -
sion in multiple disciplines. Recursion explains how we embed and combine units of 
meaning in language and other symbolic forms (the underlying syntactic, semantic, and 
semiosic dimensions). Dialogism explains why embedding “other(s’) expression” is nec -
essary in all forms of discourse and in the continuum of cultural genres over time (the 
pragmatic, social, and situated contextual dimensions). Dialogism, semiosis, and recur -
sion form a powerful set of concepts and testable hypotheses that account for collective, 
intersubjective, and generative processes of meaning-making in cultural expressions, 
processes that extend into longer continuums of cultural time, history, and ongoing 
reinterpretation of cultural artifacts. The deep Remix begins in these intersubjective and 
25
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREcollective symbolic processes and cascades out in all the specific expressive forms that 
we experience in a culture.
Collective Meaning Resources and the Cultural Encyclopedia
Our symbolic systems and media implement different component structures (e.g., lan -
guage and discourse units, structures for image genres, and multimodal units in time-
based media like music and film) in parallel architectures  for combinations at different 
levels or layers of meaning.44 There are two primary levels of meaning formation: the 
lexicon  (dictionary-level vocabulary units, any system of minimal constituents and 
meanings) and the encyclopedia  (multiple levels of conceptual organization, background 
knowledge, and symbolic associations, including the codes for individual genres).45 We 
can analyze words and phrases combined in the syntax and discourse structures of spoken 
and written genres, and, by analogy, describe an artist’s or musician’s “vocabulary” (mini -
mal constituent units) used in combinatorial structures. But what any specific composi -
tion means  in a culture (for example, a text, the combined lyrical and musical form of a 
song, or the components of a visual artwork) isn’t derived by adding up dictionary-like 
look-ups for the components. Rather, we create artifactual meanings in patterns gener -
ated from organized symbolic relations and shared knowledge at another level—net -
works of meaning that function like a cultural encyclopedia distributed through, and 
implementable across, all symbolic forms, genres, and media. This parallel architecture 
in meaning-making is summarized in Table 1.1 .
For example, the Mona Lisa  is, on one level, an instance of an Italian Renaissance 
commissioned portrait with its genre-specific vocabulary of minimal compositional 
units, but what the painting means  (in all the senses of meaning in a culture) comes 
only through the way interpreters in cultural communities access encyclopedic  
relations of symbolic value and accrued significance “outside” the vocabulary of the 
painting. What the Mona Lisa  means for us is what we can express in networks of 
interpretants (dialogic expressions) accessible in a shared cultural encyclopedia (some 
major interpretants of which are other paintings  that reference, presuppose, parody, or 
riff on the historical exemplar).
Research in cognitive semantics and semiotics shows that we make meaning by mul -
tiplexing levels of conceptual combinatorial processes in active “online” real-time inter -
pretation (Peirce’s concept of semiosis as opening onto networks of  interpretants in 
Table 1.1  Levels in the parallel architecture of generative combinatoriality
Lexicon:
Minimal constituents, vocabulary units of 
meaning composed in the grammar/
syntax of a symbolic systemCombination of constituent units in rule-
governed, unlimited recursive structures 
for dialogic embedding and future 
answerability.
Encyclopedia
System of culturally organized meanings 
and values, codes, genres, symbolic 
associationsCombination and hybridization of genres, 
types, categories, and concepts in 
network-like reconfigurable nodes of 
symbolic relations. How the contents of 
a cultural archive are organized into 
categories of meaning.
26
M. IRVINEsymbolic cognition): (1) we move up and down nested levels of conceptual generaliza -
tion or abstraction (termed semantic frames or schemes), (2) we combine, merge, or 
blend concepts to form new ones (as in metaphors and hybrid genres), and (3) we 
interpret specific instances (tokens) of cultural genres (types) through shared codes and 
encyclopedic knowledge (genres as types with collectively understood rules and codes 
and a shared cultural knowledge base of prototypes—famous versions, exemplars—of a 
type).46 Distinguishing the functions of this parallel architecture allows us to present a 
more complete description of what happens in active uses of meaning resources. 
Symbolic structures enable us to generate meanings by combining concepts that are not 
present in any specific instance, but supplied by engaging multiple cognitive levels in 
the parallel architectures of symbolic functions.
For an everyday example, most people following popular music will easily be able to 
express interpretive statements at multiple levels of meaning by invoking concepts in 
nested type categories—often mapped out in a hierarchical tree structure—that frame a 
pop song as a pop song in contexts of meaning (read “ =>” as “is an instance of”):
Jay-Z song ( +/− other associates) →
celebrity rap star song in relation to others in the genre →
rap/hip hop genre types and subtypes and symbolic values →
commercial pop song and music industry market categories →
hip hop positioned in celebrity culture and other popular culture artifacts 
(video, TV , etc.) →
global popular culture  . . . 
The conceptual frames depend on a cultural (and subcultural) encyclopedia of collective 
knowledge, values, and codes that provide the collective ground for interpretable mean -
ings. Someone unfamiliar with hip hop music genres and recent pop culture will not get 
what is going on in a Jay-Z song, but the musical codes and background knowledge  
are publically available to learn. Similarly, a painting by Andy Warhol is not interpretable 
without some familiarity with the genre categories of modern art, some background in  
the vocabularies of representation and the presupposed cultural encyclopedia, and knowl -
edge of the dialogic situation in the artworld that Warhol participated in. And, of course, 
since the dialogic continuum is ongoing, what a Warhol painting can mean today is part 
of an accruing socially accessible encyclopedia of symbolic associations and values (the 
reception history of an artist or work), forming networks of meaning that were unantici -
pated in the 1960s but are now part the dialogic situation that frames our interpretations. 
While all societies have regulating ideologies and social structures that create unequal 
access to knowledge and symbolic resources, the cognitive abilities for meaning generation 
and expression are, at all levels of this parallel architecture, intersubjective, interindivid -
ual, collective, and necessary, and vary only in individual competencies.
Remix+
Mobilizing these conceptual resources, we can redescribe Remix, appropriation, and 
hybrid works as genre implementations of the underlying generative, dialogic, recursive 
27
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREprinciples in the symbolic systems of a culture independent of any specific instantiation 
in a tangible medium. Remix as a form of ongoing dialogism is Remix+, not bundles of 
repetitions, plagiarisms, copies, or technically generated clones, but value-add interpre -
tive nodes (instantiating a time + meaning shift or increment, the “ +”) formed by neces -
sary generative, combinatorial processes in the dialogic situations of a community. 
Remix and hybrid works are articulations in forms that emerge from necessary , normative  
principles: (1) implementing generative principles for open, recursive combinatoriality 
of constituent units within rule-governed meaning systems, (2) the intersubjective, 
interindividual, and other-implicated grounds of meaning and expression (semiosis and 
dialogism as parallel generative processes), (3) the dialogic ground for appropriating and 
quoting other(s’) expression in ongoing interpretations of a culture’s artifacts through 
an intertextual/intermedial collective encyclopedia, and (4) generative processes that 
encode and externalize future-projecting collective memory  in structures of meaning des -
tined for reuse in the continuum of cultural expression.
These deep Remix principles also explain why all cultures are experienced as incom -
plete, never finalized, and in need of continual additions, supplements, and renewal of 
meaning (else why the proliferation of new expressions and works?).47 Generative dialo -
gism manifests itself in all the ways that cultural members develop sequences of recom -
bined, additive, and accruing meanings that map out new, additional routes through a 
culture’s symbolic networks. Remix+ means that cultural expression is unfinalizable and 
always future-oriented, as Bakhtin recognized:
Nothing conclusive has yet taken place in the world, the ultimate word of the 
world and about the world has not yet been spoken, the world is open and free, 
everything is still in the future and will always be in the future.48
Remix and Dialogism in Cultural Genres:  
Meaning Generation in Music
There are many ways that we can use these concepts and methods heuristically for ana -
lyzing exemplary works as interfaces to the architecture of generative dialogism in the 
symbolic systems within which a work is created and received. The contentious issues 
in high-profile cases of music sampling and appropriation art have been well-treated by 
many scholars,49 and many examples are now over-determined in the discourse and not 
as useful as paradigms of normative meaning-making processes. I would like to show how 
we can mobilize these ideas for analyzing mainstream examples in music and visual art 
to uncover the normative, generative, combinatorial, dialogic principles underlying all 
cultural genres. The value of any theory is its ability to generate testable hypotheses that 
explain what we can’t explain in other ways.
Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue  (1959) is the most commented on jazz album in history, 
forming a dense node of cultural meanings and values expressed both in interpretive 
discourse and in hundreds of appropriations and elaborations by many other musicians 
in the dialogic continuum of contemporary music.50 The album is an interface to a dia -
logic moment of major reinterpretations of the cumulative, inherited musical encyclo -
pedia (African American blues roots, jazz and bebop reinterpretations, and music theory 
in the European–American classical tradition). Combining the vocabularies and sym -
bolic values of African and European traditions, Davis positioned the hybrid 
28
M. IRVINEimprovisational form of the music in the dialogic situation of the 1950s where the musi -
cal forms were understood to symbolically encode ethnic-cultural identity and values. 
Creating this specific interpretive node as a hybrid form that combined conflicting 
registers in the encyclopedic meaning system meant adding value to both identity terms, 
African and American, as many other jazz musicians also affirmed.
Jazz improvisation is highly structured, difficult to master, and involves combinations 
of learned and continually practiced model forms and phrases that become structures in 
a generative grammar for “composing in the moment.” Musical improvisation is a direct 
analog of the “discrete infinity” through generative combinatoriality studied in lan -
guage.51 The Kind of Blue  sessions are unrehearsed ensemble improvisations done in one 
take, developed in real-time only from musical “sketches” of the formal structures. The 
songs are thus simultaneously compositions and performances, snapshots of expressive, 
open, rule-governed combinatoriality in the grammar of the musical forms.52 In each bar 
of the recorded performances, we can hear the results of the generative-recursive  
processes used to combine rhythms, tones, phrases, harmonization, and styles from a 
common vocabulary selected for contextually specific functions. In improvisation, the 
Janus-like generative combinatorial structure provides the spaces for quotations from the 
future , the about-to-be, but not-yet-said, in dialog with the live conversation of perfor -
mance and with the larger traditions internalized by the musicians. The symbolic form, 
activated in real-time, enables structured anticipations: projected future  expressions as 
possibilities in the form are already in memory  in the present moment.
Building on postbebop developments in jazz, Davis experimented with an additional 
interpretive concept: the generative potential of improvising through types of scales 
fundamental to classical music theory (scale modes ). The “grammar” for each tune on 
Kind of Blue  was based on a blues-rooted structure, but with a novel way to play impro -
vised solos by following a classical scale rather than the blues-to-bebop tradition of 
developing freer-form extempore melodies following complex chord changes.53 Davis 
commented that this approach opened “infinite possibilities” for new expression within 
the formal constraints, and the musicians refocused on the values of tone, timbre, and 
“space” within the form.54
“All Blues,” the fourth track on the album, channels the values of the deep blues 
tradition and reinterprets the canonical blues chord progression through a modal scale 
and in 6/8 time.55 A musicological description reveals how the formal  (grammatical) 
combinations were motivated by the symbolic value of combining encyclopedic  mean -
ings. The lexicon and grammar of the blues are inextricably connected to the larger 
cultural encyclopedia of meanings and values associated with the form. Iconic songs by 
Robert Johnson and others in the Delta blues diaspora encode a form stabilized in a 
template of chord progressions, a form that provided the generative structure for multi -
ple combinatorial variations in jazz and further extensions in R&B and rock genres.56
In “All Blues,” Davis appropriates and reinterprets a distinctive feature in the blues 
tradition: the “blues shuffle” pattern defined by playing notes from the fifth to the sixth 
and flat seventh scale degrees of a chord in a rhythmic ascending and descending riff on 
the bass notes (a pattern with variations used in countless blues, jazz, boogie, soul, and 
rock styles). Davis takes this Delta roots pattern known by all jazz musicians for a 12/32 
bar blues form, slows the tempo, reharmonizes the scale riff, and prescribes the 
Mixolydian scale mode for the improvised solos (a scale with notes we “feel” as minor). 
The musicians performed new, unrehearsed, improvised solos using the modal scale over 
the reinterpreted blues chord progression performances that have been widely studied, 
29
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREanalyzed, and debated for understanding the astonishing skill demanded in these rein -
terpretations of a musical form. All the levels of generativity, recursive combinatoriality, 
dialogism, and encyclopedic encoding are openly engaged. The compositions on Kind of 
Blue represent interpretive remixes on multiple levels. They are hybrid forms that affirm 
the generativity of the musical structures (jazz = unlimited creativity) in the dialogic 
situation of the culture and also renew the music’s meanings in the larger cultural ency -
clopedia for both African American and European traditions.
Turning to interpretive Remix genres based on sampling, quotation, and encyclopedic 
cross-referencing in contemporary musical forms, we find that the  technical  means for 
combinatoriality can be used to disclose the underlying recursive, generative, dialogic 
processes of the expressive forms. The cultural, historical, and technical roots of con -
temporary Remix in Jamaican dub, techno, and DJ and hip hop cultures have been 
widely studied, and the creative functions of sampling, quoting, and referencing in popu -
lar music are now commonplace knowledge.57 Sample and source hunting have now 
been converted into a fan-driven marketing device on websites like whosampled.com 
(and accompanying mobile app), which claims to “explore the DNA of music” through 
users’ identifications of “direct connections” among a song’s samples, remixes, and 
covers.58
Rather than analyzing an example here, I invite readers to make any selection of sam -
ple-based songs to use as an interface to the shared combinatorial and dialogic processes in 
the parallel architectures that made the songs possible. As an interface to, and implemen -
tation of, collective and intersubjective meaning processes, a Remix work can be used to 
reveal how the recombinations and embedded constituent musical vocabulary units (facil -
itated in automated software procedures for digital media) are motivated not by the tech -
nology but by the dialogic contexts  of the musical form and the situations of production and 
reception in the genre’s reception communities where the meaning is made.
Remix in explicit quotational and appropriation genres use the recursive combinato -
rial function for embedding constituent phrases as recognizable dialogically positioned  
units of “other’s” expression (quotations of prior and contemporaneous expressions with 
built-in addressivity and answerability). The combinatorial and dialogic process requires: 
(1) selecting syntactically possible units in contexts of prior symbolic relations and 
encyclopedic values (identifying and selecting “answerable” combinable constituent 
units represent initial interpretive process for linking token to typed meaning), and (2) 
recontextualizing the selected unit by embedding it in the compositional structure of 
the new expression, a meaning environment that opens up additional encyclopedic 
meaning relations that were not active in the situation of the prior expression. Context 
is all—in every sense of the term.
For both the composer and audiences in the cultural community, the selections of 
combinatorial units are motivated by how they can function dialogically in new or dif -
ferent contexts of meanings associated at the encyclopedic level, not as self-same copies  
or repetitions  of the already-expressed in their disquotational  lexical form (that is, in their 
prior “authored” form). The recontextualized units work as synecdoches (parts for the 
whole), not only for other songs and artists but as tokens for whole genres, styles, tradi -
tions, concepts, and cultural values. The Remix work reveals how the dialogic process 
engages our encyclopedic competencies by foregrounding subsets of the musical-cultural 
lexicon in the combinatorial structures, sets of embedded meaning units symbolically 
linked to a shared cultural encyclopedia of musical meanings, values, and signature, 
prototypical sounds.
30
M. IRVINEDaft Punk’s Random Access Memories  (RAM ) (2013) is a compendium of orchestrated 
combinatoriality and recontextualization, a paradigm of creative Remix+ through the 
generative structures of the musical genres and the affordances of the recording studio. 
For RAM , the musicians, Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo and Thomas Bangalter, 
known as “the Robots” in the music world for their techno and voice-processed sounds, 
used all the resources of state-of-the-art audio technology to recover and mix the sym -
bolic sounds  of music genre elements in prototypical analog studio recordings from the 
1970s to the 1980s.59 Working collaboratively with many other musicians and audio 
engineers at multiple recording locations, they mixed recorded instrument tracks (nota -
bly funky rhythm guitar and bass), live recordings of drum tracks, analog modular syn -
thesizers, Vocoder programming, and live orchestra recordings.60 The integration of 
analog sound and digital production is seamless, even to the point of knowledgeable 
listeners being unable to distinguish software-simulated analog sounds from those 
recorded from instruments.61
In concept and production, the album represents a deep Remix of the symbolic fea -
tures of sounds now standardized in digital samples (beats, bass grooves, riffs, percussion) 
but detached from how they were made. The musicians desampled  sampling, reverse 
engineering the library of prototypical sampled sounds (now available as digital clones 
and clichés on any laptop) by re-producing and re-capturing the symbolic audio proper -
ties of the sounds that made them so sampleable  as genre synecdoches in the first place. 
As Bangalter explains:
The idea was really having this desire for live drums, as well as questioning, 
really, why and what is the magic in samples? Why for the last 20 years have 
producers and musicians been extracting these little snippets of audio from 
vinyl records? What kind of magic did it contain?62
The “magic” was in the symbolic properties of the musical sound elements now stand -
ardized as recomposable, replicable, sampled sound units. The musicians use the tech -
nical means in recording and audio production to expose the symbolic properties of 
combinable sounds now taken for granted as “in the mix,” sounds that were sampled 
because they encoded specific sound values from specific instruments and audio tech -
nologies in their time and place.63 In effect, Daft Punk de-black-boxed Remix to 
reveal how embeddable constituent units are used symbolically in the combinatorial 
processes of the forms.
In RAM , we can observe how a recombinatorial mix—as an interpretive, dialogic 
process, not simply a technical product—is a reactivation of symbolic forms in a con -
tinuum of value-add interpretation, new expression as Remix+. Without using explicit, 
quotational sampling, Daft Punk produced an interpretive Remix of styles and genres by 
sonic tokenization, re-producing the symbolic values of constituent elements, in a large 
network of encyclopedic referencing and allusion. The dialogic network of RAM  extends 
to major concept album collaborative productions like The Beatles’ White Album , 
Michael Jackson’s Quincy Jones-produced Thriller , Pink Floyd’s The Dark Side of the 
Moon , and Fleetwood Mac’s Rumours . You don’t need to directly sample segments from 
The Beatles’ “A Day in the Life” or a specific James Brown funk groove to invoke these 
works and their values in the collective cultural encyclopedia. RAM  reveals the genera -
tive dialogic, combinatorial engine at work in a large collective, distributed network of 
cultural agents, recent and past. Fully aware of the dialogic foundations of music culture 
31
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREand their role as encyclopedic interpreters projecting musical expressions into the future, 
Daft Punk set out “to make music that others might one day sample.”64
Combinatoriality Visual Art
Remix in all its forms is an accepted fact, not a problem , in the contemporary art world. 
Art history is now widely accepted as a history of reinterpretations, appropriations, cross 
references, dialogic presuppositions, and recontextualizations. Although a canonical 
topic of postmodern theory, appropriation and hybrid genres are not products  or effects  
of postmodernism, the exposure of these forms in critical debates has opened up the 
dialogic and combinatorial processes behind all art genres.65 Although widely studied 
from multiple approaches, artworks based on appropriation and mixed sources are still 
too-often discussed as patchworks of isolated atomic units “taken” from other artifacts 
of expression, not as rule-governed genre implementations of dialogism developed in the 
combinatorial processes of the symbolic forms. Parallel with the generative processes in 
other media of expression, new combinatorial structures in visual art are motivated by 
the dialogic situations of a culture community within which the artifacts become new 
nodal positions for interpretive routes in the encyclopedic network.
As in the discussion of Remix in music genres above, I invite readers to use the con -
ceptual resources developed here to investigate works by artists that can be used as 
interfaces to the generative and collective meaning processes of their symbolic forms. 
For example, we can map out a dialogic continuum in genre hybridization, recontextu -
alization, and interpretive appropriation in the works of Robert Rauschenberg and Andy 
Warhol (from the 1950s to the 1980s) and Shepard Fairey and contemporary street 
artists (from the 1990s to the present), a dialogic continuum that continues in most 
contemporary art.66 A Google image search on these artists will provide many examples 
that can be studied and compared for further analysis. Working with well-established 
concepts in their artistic communities of practice, these artists developed exemplary 
ways to follow deep Remix principles, working intuitively and heuristically through the 
generative, recursive combinatorial rules for the symbolic systems in art genres to create 
hybrid forms as nodes in new networks of meaning.
Rauschenberg’s lifelong practice illustrates how the generative principles described in 
Chomsky’s “unbounded Merge,” unlimited semiosis, and dialogism can be expanded to 
explain the generative, recursive combinatorial principles underlying the symbolic 
structures of visual art. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Rauschenberg discovered and 
exploited a generative principle implicit in the grammar of modern art: with the redefi -
nition of painting in modernism taken for granted, the constituent combinable vocabu -
lary units in the form of a composition could come from any source or medium because 
combinatorial rules provide the “slots” or placeholders for embedding visual units, but 
do not determine the source, type, or medium for what can become meaningfully com -
bined. Parallel with Warhol’s appropriation of photographic reproduction for painting, 
Rauschenberg saw that image constituents in a composition—embeddable units within 
other units—can come from any source—reproduced photographs from the mass media, 
magazine pages, and photo reproductions of other art works.67 Photomechanical screen-
printing techniques allow multiple reuses of constituent image units in combinations 
within and across compositions in serial form, effectively erasing the boundaries between 
painting and printmaking and uniting them as image making technologies for appropri -
ating image units from both the museum archive of art history and from every form of 
32
M. IRVINEmass media imagery in popular culture.68 Graphic and painterly marks or gestures can be 
quotational (from other sources) or directly imposed on a canvas or other material sub -
strates. A combinatorial unit in a structure can also be a material object or thing—not 
representations of things but found objects from the city that function as synecdoches 
of the dense, accumulated meanings of urban experience.
Rauschenberg called his new hybrid combinations “combines,” that is, combinatorial 
meaning platforms that simultaneously engage the grammar and vocabulary for two-
dimensional genres and media (painting, printmaking, drawing, photography, collage) 
and three-dimensional meaning structures (sculpture, assemblage, found objects). The 
combined grammars and vocabularies of the forms expanded contextual possibilities and 
opened up further networks of meaning for what artworks could be. In many ways, all 
contemporary art is post-Rauschenberg in the sense of being motivated by exploring all 
possibilities of hybrid combinatoriality in the generative logic of a form and ways of 
using the combinable units as material synecdoches in contexts for configuring other, 
new, or additional encyclopedic meanings in an artist’s dialogic situation.
For a moving global index of Remix, hybridity, and dialogism in contemporary visual 
culture, street art exemplifies the generative combinatorial “unlimited creativity” prin -
ciple of ever-renewable expression.69 Shepard Fairey and other contemporary street art -
ists around the world take the always already hybrid context of art-making and visual 
culture for granted and work in the expanded dialogic environment of city streets with 
the symbolic structures of urban visual space.70 Since source material is everywhere, the 
dialogic situations of street art in urban locations motivate the interpretive remixes. 
Street artists use the city as a visual dub studio, extending the combinatorial principles 
from multiple image and graphic genres to expand appropriation, Remix, and hybridity 
in every direction: image sources, contemporary and historical styles, local and global 
cultural references, remixed for contexts and forms never anticipated in earlier postmod -
ern arguments. Street art also assumes a foundational dialogism in which each new act 
of making a work and inserting it into a street context is a response, a reply, an engage -
ment with prior works and the ongoing debate about the public visual spaces of a city. 
As dialog-in-progress, it anticipates a response, public discourse, commentary, and new, 
additional works of Remix+. The city is seen as a living historical palimpsest open for 
new inscription, rewrite culture in practice. Like jazz, street art opens onto a collabora -
tive, participatory generative process, a dialogic engine for intuitive improvisations 
always open to hybridization in ever-renewable future-directed expression.
Conclusion
From the knowledge base outlined here, we have seen how the principles of generative 
dialogism and recursive, rule-governed unlimited combinatoriality are necessary and 
normative in all symbolic systems and generate the material forms of expression used in 
a culture. Whether we consider combinatorial elements at the level of embedded quo -
tational constituents or in the deep Remix of symbolic resources whose meaning is 
contingent on networks of presupposed works, genres, and styles with complex encyclo -
pedic relations, all levels of combinatoriality are equally generated from necessary com -
binatorial functions motivated by the dialogic situations of communities in time and 
place. All meaning systems from language to multimedia are based on generative, inter -
subjective and other-implicated processes that precede any specific material 
implementation.
33
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTURESo, yes, we can’t help but Remix in forms of Remix+, regardless of the historical state 
of technical mediation. Our current technologies enable us to implement and auto -
mate preexisting symbolic functions  that are in place before using technical tools for 
recombining tokens of expression. Since we’re born into a generative symbolic con -
tinuum already in progress, we always dialogically, collectively “quote ourselves” to 
capture prior states of meaning as inputs for new interpretations in new contexts in 
materially reimplementable, remixable ways. In Lotman’s apt definition, “culture [is] 
the nonhereditary memory of the community”71 materialized in the continuum of 
encoded artifacts of expression. Cultural artifacts in all media bundle the functions of 
meaning-making into durable externalizations of intersubjective and collective cogni -
tive processes that enable the renewable continuum of human cultures in the sequences 
of their historically, dialogically situated “rewritable” forms.72 Instead of starting from 
the assumption that genres of Remix with explicit quotations are a special case (trou -
bling the ideologies of the autonomy of the work and the artist/author) requiring 
justification, explanation, or special pleading, Remix can do much more important 
cultural work when redescribed as Remix+, an implementation of the normative gen -
erative, intersubjective, and collective meaning-making processes underlying all forms 
of expression in any medium.
The evidence from the knowledge base outlined here allows us to change the starting 
point in descriptions of Remix and hybrid expressions “in tangible form.” In a Copernican 
reorientation of the point of observation, if we recenter the conversation by starting 
with the necessary intersubjective principles as defined in generative, recursive combi -
natoriality, unlimited meaning generation (semiosis), and dialogism, then the material 
form of an expression appears as a moment of orchestrated combinatoriality in the ongo -
ing interpretive, collective, meaning-making processes that necessarily precede and fol -
low it. This new orientation can counter misrecognitions about originary authorship and 
proprietary artifacts that sustain copyright law and confuse the popular understanding 
of Remix as something outside the normative and necessary structures of meaning-
making in ordinary, daily expression.
This new point of view reveals that any work produced and received in a culture, 
when decrypted from the copyright ontology force field of assignable property, is, neces -
sarily, a materialized symbolic structure encoding an interpretive dialogic pattern of 
combinatorial units, meanings, values, and ideas that came from somewhere and are on 
their way to somewhere else. In the context of debates over copyright reform in the 
interests of common culture, this knowledge base provides important scientific support 
for stronger fair use practices that counter the ideologies for “long and strong copy -
right,”73 and can enable better-informed debate about novelty (how/when/why is an 
expression “new”?) and the criteria for proprietary ownership of forms of expression. 
Legal and economic definitions of cultural property must be re-synced with these fun -
damental facts of collective, dialogic meaning-making and mediated forms of cultural 
expression.
I propose this outline for a new interdisciplinary model and reorientation of starting 
points as an open-ended research program that can be tested and developed in our 
research communities for Remix studies and for the generative principles of creativity 
more broadly. When de-black-boxed and reverse engineered with the conceptual models 
outlined here, Remix and hybrid works have much more to tell us—not as reified prod -
ucts, but as interfaces  to the generative, collective, and unfinalizable meaning-making 
processes that enable cultures to be cultures.
34
M. IRVINENotes
 1 “Remix” as a technical artifact and as a more general metaphor is widely used, notably: Kirby Ferguson, 
Everything Is a Remix , 2010–14, http://everythingisaremix.info; Brett Gaylor, Rip: A Remix Manifesto , 
DVD (The Disinformation Company, 2009); Jonathan Letham, “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism,” 
Harper’s Magazine , February 2007; Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid 
Economy  (New York: Penguin Press, 2008). Full documentation of the bibliography and access to source 
materials for this essay are available on this resource page: http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/irvinem/
Remix/.
 2 These topics are discussed from different disciplinary perspectives in Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola, 
Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011); 
Kembrew McLeod and Rudolf Kuenzli, eds., Cutting Across Media: Appropriation Art, Interventionist 
Collage, and Copyright Law  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011); Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: 
The Aesthetics of Sampling  (Vienna: Springer, 2012); Paul D. Miller (DJ Spooky), Rhythm Science  
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004); Mark Amerika, remixthebook  (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2011); Martha Woodmansee and Peter Jaszi, eds., The Construction of Authorship: Textual 
Appropriation in Law and Literature  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994); Nicolas Bourriaud, 
Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World , 2nd ed. (New York: Lukas & 
Sternberg, 2005); Lev Manovich, Software Takes Command: Extending the Language of New Media  
(London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013).
 3 Lev Manovich has developed the concept of “deep remixability” in software and media in Software Takes 
Command.
 4 My approach presupposes the background of the canonical arguments in structuralism, poststructuralism, 
postmodern cultural theory, and communication theory, but I will focus here on exploring the potential 
of a broader interdisciplinary model. The concepts and methods of the French poststructuralist tradition 
(Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida) and the core theories in semiotics (Peirce, Jacobson, Greimas, and Eco) 
are treated extensively in our scholarly literature and require no further elaboration here.
 5 See Lessig, Remix ; Letham, “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism.” Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: The 
Nature and Future of Creativity  (New York: Penguin Press, 2005); Siva Vaidhyanathan, Copyrights and 
Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens Creativity  (New York, NY: New York 
University Press, 2001); Woodmansee and Jaszi, The Construction of Authorship ; McLeod and DiCola, 
Creative License ; McLeod and Kuenzli, Cutting Across Media .
 6 McLeod and Kuenzli, Cutting Across Media , 2.
 7 Quoted in Peeter Torop, “Semiosphere And/as the Research Object of Semiotics of Culture,” Sign Systems 
Studies  33, no. 1 (March 2005): 169.
 8 See Yuri M. Lotman, Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture , trans. Ann Shukman 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990); Yuri M. Lotman and B. A. Uspensky, “On the 
Semiotic Mechanism of Culture,” New Literary History  9, no. 2 (Winter 1978): 211–232.
 9 See Pierre Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power , trans. John B. Thompson (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1991), 153–154, 214–216; Pierre Bourdieu, Practical Reason: On the Theory of Action  
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998), 96–102, 120–122.
10 On author function in copyright and political economy contexts see: Woodmansee and Jaszi, The 
Construction of Authorship ; Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance 
Back in Copyright  (Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press, 2011), 16–33.
11 Most work in French and Anglophone semiotics and cultural theory develops or critiques the theory of 
Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics , trans. Roy Harris (Peru, Il: Open Court, 1986) 
(published in French in 1916). For context and background, see Winfried Nöth, Handbook of Semiotics  
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990); Umberto Eco, A Theory of Semiotics  (Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1976); Paul Cobley, ed., The Routledge Companion to Semiotics  (Abingdon, 
UK: Routledge, 2009).
12 Peirce’s approaches have been elaborated in many fields including learning theory and computation and 
information theory, and provide a valuable heuristic model for the central questions of this essay. For 
other applications and extensions, see Robert Hodge and Gunther Kress, Social Semiotics  (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1988); Andrew Lock and Charles R. Peters, eds., Handbook of Human Symbolic 
Evolution  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996); Eco, A Theory of Semiotics .
13 Eco, A Theory of Semiotics ; Umberto Eco, “Peirce and the Semiotic Foundations of Openness: Signs as 
Texts and Texts as Signs,” in The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts  (Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1979), 175–199; Susan Petrilli and Augusto Ponzio, Semiotics Unbounded: 
35
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREInterpretive Routes Through the Open Network of Signs  (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005); T. L. 
Short, Peirce’s Theory of Signs  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009); Roland Posner, Klaus 
Robering, and Thomas A. Sebeok, eds., Semiotik/Semiotics: A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations 
of Nature and Culture , 13.1 (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1997). I am especially indebted to the work of 
Eco’s expositions of Peirce and to Petrilli and Ponzio in their productive synthesis of Peirce and Bakhtin 
in Semiotics Unbounded .
14 Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , 8 Volumes, ed. Charles Hartshorne, Paul 
Weiss, and A. W . Burks (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1931), Vol. 8, p. 332.
15 All references to the works of Peirce are from the standard editions: Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected 
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , 8 Volumes, ed. Charles Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and A. W . Burks 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1931), henceforth CP; and Charles S. Peirce, The Essential 
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings (1867–1893) , ed. Nathan Houser and Christian J. W . Kloesel, Vol. 
1 (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992); Charles S. Peirce, The Essential Peirce: Selected 
Philosophical Writings (1893–1913) , ed. Nathan Houser and Christian J. W . Kloesel, Vol. 2 (Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1998).
16 Peirce, CP, Vol. 5, p. 594.
17 Peirce, CP, Vol. 2, p. 302.
18 Peirce, CP, Vol. 4, p. 132.
19 This “classic” reading of Peirce’s ideas is well-described by Eco; see Eco, “Peirce and the Semiotic 
Foundations of Openness: Signs as Texts and Texts as Signs.”
20 Peirce, CP, Vol. 2, p. 228.
21 Peirce, CP, Vol. 1, p. 339.
22 Peirce saw semiosis as being formally open and unlimited though constrained by the rules, codes, and 
conventions of a symbolic system, the pragmatic situations of expression, and the motivation to find 
conceptual conclusions. See Eco, A Theory of Semiotics, 66–73; Umberto Eco, “Unlimited Semeiosis 
and Drift: Pragmaticism vs. ‘Pragmatism,’  ” in The Limits of Interpretation  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1990), 23–43; Jorgen Dines Johansen, Dialogic Semiosis: An Essay on Signs and Meanings  
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1993); Susan Petrilli, “Dialogism and Interpretation in the 
Study of Signs,” Semiotica  97, no. 1/2 (January 1993): 103–118.
23 This important aspect of Peirce’s thought is more fully explored in studies by Petrilli and Ponzio: Augusto 
Ponzio, “Sign, Dialogue, and Alterity,” Semiotica  173, no. 1/4 (January 2009): 129–154; Petrilli, 
“Dialogism and Interpretation in the Study of Signs”; and Petrilli and Ponzio, Semiotics Unbounded.
24 Charles S. Peirce and Victoria Welby, Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence Between Charles S. Peirce 
and Lady Victoria Welby , ed. Charles S. Hardwick (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1977), 
195.
25 Peirce, Essential Peirce : Vol. 2, p. 241.
26 Cited in Nate Chinen, “So Many Sounds, but Jazz Is the Core: Herbie Hancock Is the Emissary of an Art 
Form,” The New York Times , November 27, 2013, sec. Arts/Music, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/01/
arts/music/herbie-hancock-is-the-emissary-of-an-art-form.html.
27 On the dialogic improvisational structuredness of jazz, see Paul Berliner, Thinking in Jazz: The Infinite Art 
of Improvisation  (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1994).
28 For semiotics, the implications are usefully described by Petrilli and Ponzio, Semiotics Unbounded , and the 
wider applications in cognitive science and discourse studies are developed in Paul Thibault, Agency and 
Consciousness in Discourse: Self-Other Dynamics as a Complex System  (London: Continuum, 2004).
29 For Bakhtin’s major statements, see M. M. Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays  (Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press, 1992); M. M. Bakhtin, Speech Genres and Other Late Essays , ed. Caryl Emerson 
and Michael Holquist, trans. Vern W . McGee (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1986); Mikhail 
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics , ed. Caryl Emerson (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1984).
30 Bakhtin, Speech Genres and Other Late Essays , 87, 91.
31 See Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination , 280.
32 There is a vast literature on intertextuality and intermediality; for orientations to the use of the concept here 
see: Petrilli, “Dialogism and Interpretation in the Study of Signs”; Umberto Eco, “Metaphor, Dictionary, and 
Encyclopedia,” New Literary History 15, no. 2 (Winter 1984): 255–271; Lotman and Uspensky, “On the 
Semiotic Mechanism of Culture”; Norman Fairclough, “Discourse and Text: Linguistic and Intertextual 
Analysis Within Discourse Analysis,” Discourse & Society 3, no. 2 (April 1, 1992): 193–217.
33 Accessible introductions to major topics include: Yan Huang, Pragmatics  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2007); Teun A. van Dijk, Text and Context: Explorations in the Semantics and Pragmatics of Discourse  
36
M. IRVINE(London: Longman, 1977); Talmy Givón, Context as Other Minds: The Pragmatics of Sociality, Cognition, 
and Communication  (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2005).
34 See Deborah Tannen, Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue, and Imagery in Conversational Discourse , 2nd ed. 
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007); Deborah Tannen, “Intertextuality in Interaction: 
Reframing Family Arguments in Public and Private,” Text & Talk  26, no. 4/5 (July 2006): 597–617; 
Deborah Tannen, “Abduction, Dialogicality and Prior Text: The Taking on of Voices in Conversational 
Discourse” (presented at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, Baltimore, MD, 
2009), http://faculty.georgetown.edu/tannend/lsa%20plenary%20written%20version.pdf.
35 Lotman, Universe of the Mind , 143–144.
36 Ray Jackendoff provides excellent guides to the current state of research and recent debates; see 
Jackendoff, Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution (New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, USA, 2003); Ray Jackendoff, “Linguistics in Cognitive Science: The State of the Art,” 
Linguistic Review  24, no. 4 (December 2007): 347–401; Ray Jackendoff, “What Is the Human Language 
Faculty? T wo Views,” Language  87, no. 3 (2011): 586–624. Much of the recent debate on language and 
recursion expands or critiques Chomsky’s theory since the Minimalist Program; see: Noam Chomsky, The 
Minimalist Program  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995) and Noam Chomsky, “Approaching UG From 
Below,” in Interfaces + Recursion = Language? Chomsky’s Minimalism and the View From Syntax-Semantics , 
ed. Uli Sauerland and Hans-Martin Gärtner (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2007), 1–29.
37 The “unbounded Merge” operation is a key feature of Chomsky’s recent theory; see Chomsky, The 
Minimalist Program .
38 Chomsky, “Approaching UG From Below,” 5.
39 Chomsky states:
The conclusion that Merge falls within UG [Universal Grammar] holds whether such recursive gen -
eration is unique to FL [the Faculty of Language] or is appropriated from other systems  . . . [I]t is 
interesting to ask whether this operation is language-specific. We know that it is not.
(Chomsky, “Approaching UG From Below,” 7)
 For applications and examples, see Ray Jackendoff and Fred Lerdahl, “The Capacity for Music: What Is 
It, and What’s Special About It?,” Cognition 100, no. 1 (May 2006): 33–72; Fred Lerdahl and Ray S. 
Jackendoff, A Generative Theory of Tonal Music (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996); Jean Nattiez, Music 
and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of Music  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990); Raymond 
Monelle, Linguistics and Semiotics in Music  (Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic, 1992).
40 See Pauli Brattico, “Recursion Hypothesis Considered as a Research Program for Cognitive Science,” 
Minds and Machines  20, no. 2 (July 1, 2010): 213–241; Michael C. Corballis, The Recursive Mind: The 
Origins of Human Language, Thought, and Civilization  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011); 
Steven Pinker, The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language  (New York, NY: William Morrow 
& Company, 1994), 122–126, 201–206, 377–380.
41 See Marc D. Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W . Tecumseh Fitch, “The Faculty of Language: What Is  
It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?,” Science  298, no. 5598, New Series (November 22, 2002): 
1569–1579; Steven Pinker and Ray Jackendoff, “The Faculty of Language: What’s Special About It?,” 
Cognition  95, no. 2 (March 2005): 201–236; Harry van der Hulst, ed., Recursion and Human Language  
(Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 2010); Uli Sauerland and Hans-Martin Gärtner, eds., Interfaces + Recursion = 
Language? Chomsky’s Minimalism and the View From Syntax-Semantics  (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2007); 
and Corballis, The Recursive Mind .
42 Pinker and Jackendoff, “The Faculty of Language,” 211.
43 Pinker and Jackendoff emphasize that recursion and syntactic structures support meaning in expression: 
“The only reason language needs to be recursive is because its function is to express recursive thoughts. 
If there were not any recursive thoughts, the means of expression would not need recursion either.” Pinker 
and Jackendoff, “The Faculty of Language,” 230.
44 See Jackendoff’s parallel architecture model: Jackendoff, Foundations of Language , 107–264; and 
Jackendoff, “The Parallel Architecture and Its Place in Cognitive Science,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
Linguistic Analysis , edited by Bernd Heine and Heiko Narrog, 643–668.
45 For introductions to the descriptive levels of lexicon and encyclopedia see: Vyvyan Evans and Melanie 
Green, Cognitive Linguistics: An Introduction  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2006); and Dirk 
Geeraerts, ed., Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings  (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2006); Jackendoff, 
Foundations of Language , 271–293; Ray S. Jackendoff, Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental 
Structure  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 43–75; Eco, A Theory of Semiotics , 84–120; Umberto Eco, 
37
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTURESemiotics and the Philosophy of Language  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1984), 68–86, 
97–108, 124–129; and Eco, “Metaphor, Dictionary, and Encyclopedia.”
46 See Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner, The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden 
Complexities  (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2002); George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live 
By, 2nd ed. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2003); Ray S. Jackendoff, Semantics and Cognition  
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985); Ray Jackendoff, Meaning and the Lexicon: The Parallel Architecture 
(1975–2010) (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2010), 1–39; Givón, Context as Other Minds .
47 This is a central thesis of Lotman and Uspensky, “On the Semiotic Mechanism of Culture.”
48 Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics , 166.
49 See Joanna Demers,  Steal This Music: How Intellectual Property Law Affects Musical Creativity (Athens, 
GA: University of Georgia Press, 2006); Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons 
in a Connected World  (New York, NY: Vintage, 2002); Rosemary J. Coombe, The Cultural Life of 
Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation, and the Law  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1998); Kembrew McLeod, Freedom of Expression®: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual 
Property (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007); Vaidhyanathan, Copyrights and 
Copywrongs; Woodmansee and Jaszi, The Construction of Authorship; William Patry, Moral Panics 
and the Copyright Wars (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009); Aufderheide and Jaszi, Reclaiming 
Fair Use , 34–93.
50 See Ashley Kahn, Kind of Blue: The Making of the Miles Davis Masterpiece  (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo 
Press, 2007); Richard Williams, The Blue Moment: Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue and the Remaking of Modern 
Music  (New York: W . W . Norton, 2010).
51 See Berliner, Thinking in Jazz ; Peter W . Culicover, “Linguistics, Cognitive Science, and All That Jazz,” 
Linguistic Review  22, no. 2/4 (June 2005): 227–248; P . N. Johnson-Laird, “How Jazz Musicians Improvise,” 
Music Perception  19, no. 3 (March 2002): 415–442.
52 On the generative principles in improvisation, see Berliner, Thinking in Jazz ; and Aaron Berkowitz, The 
Improvising Mind: Cognition and Creativity in the Musical Moment  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010).
53 For general background, see Ted Gioia, The History of Jazz , 2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2011), 271–274; and Kahn, Kind of Blue ; and on the use of the modal scales, see Samuel Barrett, “Kind 
of Blue and the Economy of Modal Jazz,” Popular Music  25, no. 02 (2006): 185–200.
54 Miles Davis interview, in Paul Maher and Michael K Dorr, eds., Miles on Miles: Interviews and Encounters 
with Miles Davis  (Chicago, IL: Lawrence Hill Books, 2009), 18.
55 For background, see Kahn, Kind of Blue , 142–152.
56 On the history and forms of blues, see Ted Gioia, Delta Blues: The Life and Times of the Mississippi Masters 
Who Revolutionized American Music  (New York: W . W . Norton, 2008); Alan Lomax, The Land Where the 
Blues Began  (New York: Delta/Dell, 1994).
57 Useful studies and background include: Miller (DJ Spooky), Rhythm Science ; Christoph Cox and Daniel 
Warner, eds., Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music  (New York: Continuum, 2004); Michael Veal, 
Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae  (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 
2007); Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip Hop Generation  (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 2005); Mark Katz, Groove Music: The Art and Culture of the Hip-Hop DJ (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2012); Navas, Remix Theory ; David Dworsky and Victor Köhler, PressPausePlay , Documentary Film 
(House of Radon, 2011).
58 See http://www.whosampled.com.
59 See Simon Reynolds, “Daft Punk Gets Human With a New Album,” The New York Times , May 15, 2013, 
sec. Arts/Music, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/arts/music/daft-punk-gets-human-with-a-new-
album.html; Geeta Dayal, “Daft Punk’s Random Access Memories,” Slate, May 21, 2013, http://www.
slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2013/05/daft_punk_s_random_access_memories_reviewed.single.html; 
Andre Torres, “Quantum Leap: Daft Punk Go From Sampling Disco Records to Creating Disco Records,” 
Wax Poetics (55), 2013, http://www.waxpoetics.com/features/articles/quantum-leap.
60 The major collaborations are well-documented in a series of videos about the production of the album. 
See Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | The Collaborators: Nile Rodgers , 2013, http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v =da_Yp9BOCaI&feature =youtube_gdata_player; Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | 
The Collaborators: Giorgio Moroder , 2013, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v =eYDvxo-
M0OQ&feature =youtube_gdata_player; Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | The Collaborators: 
Pharrell Williams , 2013, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v =6QVtHogFrI0&feature =youtube_gdata_player.
61 If you listen to RAM with good audio equipment you will hear a different quality of sound from Daft 
Punk’s earlier recordings and from most popular music releases. Rhythm, groove, and beat elements 
38
M. IRVINE(which are now emulated or simulated in digital loops and samples in techno and dance music) are mixed 
almost entirely from live recordings by musicians.
62 Kerry Mason and Thomas Bangalter, “Daft Punk on EDM Producers: ‘They’re Missing the Tools’ 
(Interview),” Text, Billboard , May 6, 2013, http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/code/1560708/
daft-punk-on-edm-producers-theyre-missing-the-tools.
63 On the technical details of the album production, see Paul Tingen, “Daft Punk: Peter Franco & Mick 
Guzauski: Recording Random Access Memories,” Sound on Sound , July 2013, http://www.soundonsound.
com/sos/jul13/articles/daft-punk.htm.
64 Reynolds, “Daft Punk Gets Human With a New Album.”
65 For useful compendiums of sources on appropriation and interpreting a cultural archive, see David Evans, 
ed., Appropriation  (London & Cambridge, MA: Whitechapel & MIT Press, 2009); Charles Merewether, 
ed., The Archive  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006); other important studies include Douglas Crimp, On 
the Museum’s Ruins  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993; Martha Buskirk, The Contingent Object of 
Contemporary Art  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003); Bourriaud, Postproduction ; Nicolas Bourriaud, 
Altermodern: Tate Triennial  (London & New York: Tate Publications & Harry Abrams, 2009); McLeod 
and Kuenzli, Cutting Across Media .
66 I treat the continuum of appropriation from postmodern art to street art in Martin Irvine, “The Work on 
the Street: Street Art and Visual Culture,” in The Handbook of Visual Culture , ed. Ian Heywood and Barry 
Sandywell (London: Berg, 2012), 235–278.
67 On Rauschenberg’s combinatorial methods, see Branden W . Joseph, Random Order: Robert Rauschenberg 
and the Neo-Avant-Garde  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003); Branden W . Joseph, ed., Robert Rauschenberg  
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002); Robert Rauschenberg, Robert Rauschenberg: Works, Writings and 
Interviews , ed. Sam Hunter (Barcelona, Spain & New York: Ediciones Polígrafa & D.A.P ./Distributed Art 
Publications, 2006); Crimp, On the Museum’s Ruins .
68 See Crimp, On the Museum’s Ruins ; Rosalind Krauss, “Perpetual Inventory,” October  88 (Spring 1999): 
87–116; Robert S. Mattison, Robert Rauschenberg: Breaking Boundaries  (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2003).
69 Books and catalogues can’t keep up, so the best real-time index to global street art are the many websites 
devoted to the form and movement. See especially: http://www.woostercollective.com (and their projects 
and books); http://blog.vandalog.com; http://www.brooklynstreetart.com (more than Brooklyn).
70 See Irvine, “The Work on the Street: Street Art and Visual Culture” for a study of the dialogic contexts 
of street art.
71 Lotman and Uspensky, “On the Semiotic Mechanism of Culture,” 213.
72 Lawrence Lessig has developed arguments about “Read Only”/“Rewrite” cultures, but his view is based 
on the properties of technologies rather than on the underlying and necessary principles of symbolic 
systems that precede a specific technical implementation; see Lessig, Remix .
73 See the excellent proposals for stronger fair use in Aufderheide and Jaszi, Reclaiming Fair Use .
Bibliography
Amerika, Mark. remixthebook . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Aufderheide, Patricia, and Peter Jaszi. Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright . 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
1984.
——. Speech Genres and Other Late Essays . Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1986.
——. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays . Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1992.
Baraka, Amiri. Blues People: Negro Music in White America . New York: William Morrow and Company, 
1963.
Barrett, Samuel. “Kind of Blue and the Economy of Modal Jazz.” Popular Music  25, no. 02 (2006): 
185–200.
Barthes, Roland. Elements of Semiology . New York: Hill and Wang, 1973.
——. “From Work to Text.” In Image, Music, Text , translated by Stephen Heath, 155–164. New York: 
Hill and Wang, 1988.
Berkowitz, Aaron. The Improvising Mind: Cognition and Creativity in the Musical Moment . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2010.
39
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTUREBerliner, Paul. Thinking in Jazz: The Infinite Art of Improvisation . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press, 1994.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Language and Symbolic Power . John B. Thompson, trans. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1991.
——. Practical Reason: On the Theory of Action . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998.
Bourriaud, Nicolas. Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World . 2nd ed.  
New York: Lukas & Sternberg, 2005.
——. Altermodern: Tate Triennial . London & New York: Tate Publications & Harry Abrams, 2009.
Boyle, James. Shamans, Software, and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Brattico, Pauli. “Recursion Hypothesis Considered as a Research Program for Cognitive Science.” 
Minds and Machines  20, no. 2 (July 1, 2010): 213–241.
Buskirk, Martha. The Contingent Object of Contemporary Art . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Chang, Jeff. Can’t Stop Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip Hop Generation . New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
2005.
Chinen, Nate. “So Many Sounds, but Jazz Is the Core: Herbie Hancock Is the Emissary of an Art 
Form.” The New York Times , November 27, 2013, sec. Arts/Music. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/ 
12/01/arts/music/herbie-hancock-is-the-emissary-of-an-art-form.html.
Chomsky, Noam. The Minimalist Program . Cambridge, MA: MIT  Press, 1995.
——. “Approaching UG From Below.” In Interfaces + Recursion = Language? Chomsky’s Minimalism and 
the View From Syntax-Semantics , ed. Uli Sauerland and Hans-Martin Gärtner, 1–29. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter, 2007.
Cobley, Paul, ed. The Routledge Companion to Semiotics . Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2009.
Coombe, Rosemary J. The Cultural Life of Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation, and the Law. 
Durham , NC: Duke University Press, 1998.
Corballis, Michael C. “The Uniqueness of Human Recursive Thinking.” American Scientist  95, no. 3 
(June 2007): 240–248.
——. The Recursive Mind: The Origins of Human Language, Thought, and Civilization . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2011.
Cox, Christoph, and Daniel Warner, eds. Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music . New York: 
Continuum, 2004.
Crimp, Douglas. On the Museum’s Ruins . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.
Culicover, Peter W . “Linguistics, Cognitive Science, and All That Jazz.” Linguistic Review  22, no. 2/4 
(June 2005): 227–248.
Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | The Collaborators: Giorgio Moroder , 2013. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v =eYDvxo-M0OQ&feature =youtube_gdata_player.
Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | The Collaborators: Nile Rodgers , 2013. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=da_Yp9BOCaI&feature =youtube_gdata_player.
Daft Punk | Random Access Memories | The Collaborators: Pharrell Williams , 2013. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v =6QVtHogFrI0&feature =youtube_gdata_player.
Dayal, Geeta. “Daft Punk’s Random Access Memories.” Slate, May 21, 2013. http://www.slate.com/
articles/arts/music_box/2013/05/daft_punk_s_random_access_memories_reviewed.single.html.
De Saussure, Ferdinand. Course in General Linguistics . Roy Harris, trans. Peru, IL: Open Court, 1986.
Demers, Joanna. Steal This Music: How Intellectual Property Law Affects Musical Creativity . Athens, GA: 
University of Georgia Press, 2006.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Dworsky, David, and Victor Köhler. PressPausePlay . Documentary Film. House of Radon, 2011.
Eco, Umberto. A Theory of Semiotics . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1976.
——. “Peirce and the Semiotic Foundations of Openness: Signs as Texts and Texts as Signs.” In The 
Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts , 175–199. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1979.
——. “Metaphor, Dictionary, and Encyclopedia.” New Literary History  15, no. 2 (Winter 1984): 255–271.
——. Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1984.
40
M. IRVINE——. “Unlimited Semeiosis and Drift: Pragmaticism vs. ‘Pragmatism.’  ” In The Limits of Interpretation , 
23–43. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Evans, David, ed. Appropriation . London & Cambridge, MA: Whitechapel & MIT Press, 2009.
Evans, Vyvyan, and Melanie Green. Cognitive Linguistics: An Introduction . Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2006.
Fairclough, Norman. “Discourse and Text: Linguistic and Intertextual Analysis Within Discourse 
Analysis.” Discourse & Society  3, no. 2 (April 1, 1992): 193–217.
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending And The Mind’s Hidden 
Complexities . New York: Basic Books, 2002.
Ferguson, Kirby. Everything Is a Remix  (Parts 1 –4). Documentary videos, 2010–14. http://
everythingisaremix.info.
Gaylor, Brett. Rip: A Remix Manifesto . DVD. The Disinformation Company, 2009.
Geeraerts, Dirk, ed. Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2006.
Gioia, Ted. Delta Blues: The Life and Times of the Mississippi Masters Who Revolutionized American Music . 
New York: W . W . Norton, 2008.
——. The History of Jazz . 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Givón, Talmy. Context as Other Minds: The Pragmatics of Sociality, Cognition, and Communication . 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2005.
Hauser, Marc D., Noam Chomsky, and W . Tecumseh Fitch. “The Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who 
Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science  298, no. 5598. New Series (November 22, 2002): 1569–1579.
Hodge, Robert, and Gunther Kress. Social Semiotics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988.
Huang, Yan. Pragmatics . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Hulst, Harry van der, ed. Recursion and Human Language . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2010.
Irvine, Martin. “The Work on the Street: Street Art and Visual Culture.” In The Handbook of Visual 
Culture , edited by Ian Heywood and Barry Sandywell, 235–278. London: Berg, 2012.
Jackendoff, Ray. Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2003.
——. “Linguistics in Cognitive Science: The State of the Art.” Linguistic Review  24, no. 4 (December 
2007): 347–401.
——. “The Parallel Architecture and Its Place in Cognitive Science.” In The Oxford Handbook of 
Linguistic Analysis , edited by Bernd Heine and Heiko Narrog, 643–668. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2009.
——. Meaning and the Lexicon: The Parallel Architecture (1975–2010) . New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2010
——. “What Is the Human Language Faculty?: T wo Views.” Language  87, no. 3 (2011): 586–624.
Jackendoff, Ray, and Fred Lerdahl. “The Capacity for Music: What Is It, and What’s Special About It?” 
Cognition  100, no. 1 (May 2006): 33–72.
Jackendoff, Ray S. Semantics and Cognition . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.
——. Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental Structure . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2007.
Johansen, Jorgen Dines. Dialogic Semiosis: An Essay on Signs and Meanings . Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1993.
Johnson-Laird, P . N. “How Jazz Musicians Improvise.” Music Perception  19, no. 3 (March 2002): 415–442.
Joseph, Branden W . Random Order: Robert Rauschenberg and the Neo-Avant-Garde . Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2003.
——, ed. Robert Rauschenberg . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Kahn, Ashley. Kind of Blue: The Making of the Miles Davis Masterpiece . Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 
2007.
Katz, Mark. Groove Music: The Art and Culture of the Hip-Hop DJ . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Krauss, Rosalind. “Perpetual Inventory.” October  88 (Spring 1999): 87–116.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By . 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago 
Press, 2003.
41
REMIX AND THE DIALOGIC ENGINE OF CULTURELerdahl, Fred, and Ray S. Jackendoff. A Generative Theory of Tonal Music . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1996.
Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World . New York: 
Vintage, 2002.
——. Free Culture: The Nature and Future of Creativity . New York: Penguin Press, 2005.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin Press, 2008.
Letham, Jonathan. “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism.” Harper’s Magazine , February 2007.
Lock, Andrew, and Charles R. Peters, eds. Handbook of Human Symbolic Evolution . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1996.
Lomax, Alan. The Land Where the Blues Began . New York: Delta/Dell, 1994.
Lotman, Yuri M. Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture . Ann Shukman, trans. Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Lotman, Yuri M., and B. A. Uspensky. “On the Semiotic Mechanism of Culture.” New Literary History  
9, no. 2 (Winter 1978): 211–232.
Maher, Paul, and Michael K. Dorr, eds. Miles on Miles: Interviews and Encounters with Miles Davis . 
Chicago, IL: Lawrence Hill Books, 2009.
Manovich, Lev. Software Takes Command: Extending the Language of New Media . London: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2013.
Mason, Kerry, and Thomas Bangalter. “Daft Punk on EDM Producers: ‘They’re Missing the Tools’ 
(Interview).” Billboard , May 6, 2013. http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/code/1560708/
daft-punk-on-edm-producers-theyre-missing-the-tools.
Mattison, Robert S. Robert Rauschenberg: Breaking Boundaries . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2003.
McLeod, Kembrew. Freedom of Expression®: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property . 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
McLeod, Kembrew, and Peter DiCola. Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
McLeod, Kembrew, and Rudolf Kuenzli, eds. Cutting Across Media: Appropriation Art, Interventionist 
Collage, and Copyright Law . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Merewether, Charles, ed. The Archive . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006.
Miller (DJ Spooky), Paul D. Rhythm Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
——, ed. Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and Culture . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Monelle, Raymond. Linguistics and Semiotics in Music . Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic, 1992.
Nattiez, Jean. Music and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of Music . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1990.
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . Vienna: Springer, 2012.
Nöth, Winfried. Handbook of Semiotics . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Patry, William. Moral Panics and the Copyright Wars . New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Peirce, Charles S. The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings (1867–1893) . Edited by Nathan 
Houser and Christian J. W . Kloesel. Vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992.
——. The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings (1893–1913) . Edited by Nathan Houser and 
Christian J. W . Kloesel. Vol. 2. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1998.
Peirce, Charles S., and Victoria Welby. Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence Between Charles S. Peirce and 
Lady Victoria Welby . Edited by Charles S. Hardwick. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1977.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, 8 Volumes . Edited by Charles 
Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and A. W . Burks. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1931.
Petrilli, Susan. “Dialogism and Interpretation in the Study of Signs.” Semiotica  97, no. 1/2 (January 
1993): 103–118.
Petrilli, Susan, and Augusto Ponzio. Semiotics Unbounded: Interpretive Routes Through the Open Network 
of Signs . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.
Pinker, Steven. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language . New York: William Morrow & 
Company, 1994.
42
M. IRVINEPinker, Steven, and Ray Jackendoff. “The Faculty of Language: What’s Special About It?” Cognition  
95, no. 2 (March 2005): 201–236.
Ponzio, Augusto. “Dialogic Gradation in the Logic of Interpretation: Deduction, Induction, 
Abduction.” Semiotica  153, no. 1/4 (February 2005): 155–173.
——. “Sign, Dialogue, and Alterity.” Semiotica  173, no. 1/4 (January 2009): 129–154.
Posner, Roland, Klaus Robering, and Thomas A. Sebeok, eds. Semiotik/Semiotics: A Handbook on the 
Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture . 13.1. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 1997.
Rauschenberg, Robert. Robert Rauschenberg: Works, Writings and Interviews . Edited by Sam Hunter. 
Barcelona & New York: Ediciones Polígrafa; D.A.P . & Distributed Art Publications, 2006.
Reynolds, Simon. “Daft Punk Gets Human With a New Album.” The New York Times , May 15, 2013, 
sec. Arts/Music. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/arts/music/daft-punk-gets-human-with-a-
new-album.html.
Sauerland, Uli, and Hans-Martin Gärtner, eds. Interfaces + Recursion = Language? Chomsky’s Minimalism 
and the View From Syntax-Semantics . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2007.
Sebeok, Thomas A., and Marcel Danesi. The Forms of Meaning: Modeling Systems Theory and Semiotic 
Analysis . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1999.
Short, T. L. Peirce’s Theory of Signs . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Silverman, Hugh J. Cultural Semiosis: Tracing the Signifier . London: Routledge, 1998.
Tagg, Philip. Music’s Meanings: A Modern Musicology for Non-Musos . New York: Mass Media Music 
Scholars’ Press, 2012.
Tannen, Deborah. “Intertextuality in Interaction: Reframing Family Arguments in Public and Private.” 
Text & Talk  26, no. 4/5 (July 2006): 597–617.
——. Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue, and Imagery in Conversational Discourse . 2nd ed. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
——. “Abduction, Dialogicality and Prior Text: The Taking on of Voices in Conversational Discourse.” 
Baltimore, MD, 2009. http://faculty.georgetown.edu/tannend/lsa%20plenary%20written%20version.pdf.
Thibault, Paul. Agency and Consciousness in Discourse: Self-Other Dynamics as a Complex System . 
London: Continuum, 2004.
Tingen, Paul. “Daft Punk: Peter Franco & Mick Guzauski: Recording Random Access Memories.” 
Sound on Sound , July 2013. http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/jul13/articles/daft-punk.htm.
Tomalin, Marcus. Linguistics and the Formal Sciences: The Origins of Generative Grammar . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
——. “Syntactic Structures and Recursive Devices: A Legacy of Imprecision.” Journal of Logic, Language 
and Information  20, no. 3 (July 1, 2011): 297–315.
Torop, Peeter. “Semiosphere And/as the Research Object of Semiotics of Culture.” Sign Systems Studies  
33, no. 1 (March 2005): 159–173.
Torres, Andre. “Quantum Leap: Daft Punk Go From Sampling Disco Records to Creating Disco 
Records.” Wax Poetics , 2013. http://www.waxpoetics.com/features/articles/quantum-leap.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity . New York: New York University Press, 2001.
Van Dijk, Teun A. Text and Context: Explorations in the Semantics and Pragmatics of Discourse . London: 
Longman, 1977.
Veal, Michael. Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae . Middletown, CT: Wesleyan 
University Press, 2007.
Williams, Richard. The Blue Moment: Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue and the Remaking of Modern Music . New 
York: W . W . Norton, 2010.
Woodmansee, Martha, and Peter Jaszi, eds. The Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in Law 
and Literature . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994.
432
A RHETORIC OF REMIX
Scott H. Church
I urge all who intend to acquaint themselves with my speech, first, that it is a mixed 
discourse , composed with an eye to all these subjects.1
I’m always sampling loops and hooks, and cataloguing them and quantizing them, and then 
I try out different combinations all day long of those +samples.2
Remix is usually considered a technological, musical, and/or legal phenomenon. 
Literature regarding remix, for example, often gravitates to a description of digital sam -
pling and its related legal or ethical ramifications. This chapter diverges from these 
approaches in several ways. I make the case for examining remix as a communicative 
practice, a frame that illuminates the rhetorical dimensions, persuasive possibilities, and 
cultural implications of remixed artifacts. Second, remix is usually thought of as a genu -
inely new phenomenon.3 However, seeing remix as simply a function of the recombina -
tory capacities of digital media eludes the historical antecedents to remix found in the 
rhetorical tradition. When viewed in this light, remix practices hark back to the classi -
cal culture of collectivism, re-creation, and performance in cultural production.4 
Situating remix in a broader historical trajectory provides a richer sense of its location 
in contemporary culture.
Admittedly, remix and rhetoric appear to be an odd couple. After all, rhetoric is called 
“the art of speaking well,” historically concerned with oral speech.5 Classical rhetoric 
and digital culture, however, share some surprising similarities. Foremost, rhetoric and 
many forms of digital media are concerned with attracting and sustaining the attention 
of audiences, primarily by using style and aesthetics as vehicles for persuasion. When 
one considers the attention demands of information-abundant environments, rhetoric 
becomes an especially useful hermeneutic. For Richard Lanham, living in the informa -
tion age is akin to drinking from a fire hose: the production of information has over -
whelmed our ability to pay attention to it all.6 Though rhetoric has traditionally been 
conceived of as the art of persuasion in speech, it might, following Lanham, be best 
considered as an “economics of attention.”7 Rhetoricians, in fact, have assumed that 
attention was a scarce resource all along, so rhetorical theory usually postulates how to 
“skillfully allocate”8 that resource. Rhetoric has been defined as the “art of using lan -
guage to help people narrow their choices”9 and “attend to what we would like them to 
attend to.”10 In order to be persuaded, the audience must be given options and then be 
directed to focus its attention toward certain choices.
44
S. H. CHURCHBoth oratory and remix focus attention through invention , the process of discovering and 
generating novel arguments. Invention is both cognitive and collaborative. It is cognitive 
in the sense that the orator needs to mentally synthesize previously discovered arguments, 
and collaborative in the sense that the interaction of the orator and the audience may be 
crucial in formulating one’s arguments. Invention is what makes the persuasive potential 
of remix possible because it entails the use of creative imitation  and sampling ; the remixer 
participates in a practice similar to the ancient orators, creating links between samples by 
exploiting and leveraging the audience’s understanding of the samples in their original 
contexts. When DJs choose a sample of music, for example, their selection is rhetorical 
because they deem one sample to be more appropriate than another.
To further explore the link between rhetoric and remix, I will recast the classical 
rhetorician Isocrates as a protoremix artist. His liminal teachings suggest some rhetorical 
norms that antecede remix culture. I will then show how the mashups by Gregg Gillis, 
also known as the remix artist Girl Talk, can be understood as a digitally networked 
incarnation of Isocratic rhetoric.
Isocrates, Protoremix Artist
Isocrates is one of the most important classical philosophers of rhetoric—though he is less 
appreciated in our times than his contemporaries Plato and Aristotle. He lived in Greece 
from 435 to 338 BCE and established a school for training the citizens in the practical art 
of speaking persuasively.11 Isocrates was also one of the first to use writing—a new technol -
ogy—to distribute pamphlets that publicized his ideas. Relating to his embrace of early 
technologies of communication, Kathleen Welch argues that Isocrates used innovative 
techniques we now associate with the digital age: “His writing fluctuates between eye 
dominance and ear dominance. He relies, in fact, on what we now regard as sampling, a 
musical construction defined by recording one musical text onto another.”12 Isocrates’s 
pedagogy was similarly oriented toward inspiring others to use imitatio  and sample the 
discourses of other admirable orators and leaders—two key Isocratic themes that can 
inform contemporary remix culture.
Prior to exploring these themes, it is worth noting that making the transition between 
Isocratic thought and contemporary remix is not always a seamless endeavor; the con -
cepts may be understood differently for their respective times. Isocratic sampling, for 
example, had a certain function in classical rhetoric that does not translate exactly into 
the contemporary connotations of sampling in remix. However, there are striking paral -
lels between both epochs that are well worth examining.
Imitatio
Classical imitation, also called imitatio , was key to Isocrates’s teaching because it required 
the student to emulate a skilled orator and thus improve his or her own speech.13 
Contrary to the Romantic interpretation that imitation was the act of merely repeating 
or copying existing texts, John Muckelbauer argues that “imitation was the single most 
common instructional method in the West for well over two millennia.”14 Creative 
imitation was a productive and inventive process that spurred rhetorical invention pri -
marily through interpretation, variation, creativity, and novelty.
Interpretation is not only critical to imitatio , it is useful to distinguish classical imita -
tion from the Romantic framing that still permeates contemporary understandings of 
45
A RHETORIC OF REMIXthe term. In classical times, creative imitation of other orators allowed neophytes to 
gain experience by isolating what was appropriate for each situation, and then use it 
accordingly. Further, the student needed to exercise prudence in selecting the right 
model to imitate. One of the objectives of imitation was to create an exact replica of 
the model. However, if the model was flawed in some way, the student needed to be 
sufficiently conscientious to avoid imitating the weaknesses, interpreting instead the 
strengths upon which he or she could build. Similarly, contemporary remix is predi -
cated upon imitatio ; in order to create a mashup, the remixer will creatively appropri -
ate and then transform the song by sampling it. In other words, remix enacts imitatio , 
not the reductive model of imitation qua imitation we often think of with contempo -
rary art. Whereas the artistic process of imitation is labor-intensive, sampling performs 
imitatio  when it removes the element of labor (traditionally understood) from the 
imitation and focuses rather on the express interpretation of the artifact. The remixer 
does imitate the source material insofar as it creates a contrast and thus evinces the 
novelty of the remix. Therefore, as in the time of Isocrates, the remixer is not engaging 
in mere repetition of the original song, but rather manipulating it in order to use it in 
a new context.
Imitatio  was also an inventive practice because it yielded variation rather than exact 
reproduction.15 This variation was closely related to the students’ mandate to conduct 
research before imitation. Roman rhetorician Quintilian, channeling Isocrates’s strate -
gies of imitation, invited students of rhetoric to perform “an investigation of [an orator’s] 
good qualities” before imitating them.16 In effect, the student would create a mashup of 
the numerous good qualities of multiple model orators, thus paying tribute to them. 
Likewise, when remixers imitate artists by sampling their songs, they often do so to pay 
homage to that artist.17 They acknowledge that the artist being sampled has created a 
memorable original piece worthy of being used as a sample. This imitation-as-homage 
model is a contemporary manifestation of Isocratic practices. Remixers also use variation 
by carefully and critically examining different songs to fit in the remix, often remixing 
songs until they are altered into unrecognizable samples. For example, the DJ El-P  
confesses, “If you can catch me [using familiar samples] then I haven’t done my job.”18 
To perform variation, DJs must exploit an interpretive repertoire spanning tempos, 
beats, samples, a cappella vocals and more.
Creativity was also essential to classical imitative practices. In fact, Isocrates viewed 
imitation as a “creative and productive process,”19 determined by the inventiveness of 
the speaker in responding to those models in flexible and creative ways.20 When taking 
the variation of differing models into account, the students were able to creatively 
manipulate the speech to tailor it to their own ends. Ultimately, the success of the imita -
tion would be gauged by the speaker’s innovative interpretation, coupled with the audi -
ence’s sophisticated reception.21 Knowing which portions of what speeches to imitate 
required a great amount of knowledge, but knowing how to reassemble those samples 
together into one unified discourse required a high level of creativity.
Therefore, novelty and holistic coherence were other desired by-products of a success -
fully elevated imitation. When students of rhetoric would imitate multiple orators and 
converge those examples into their own tailored oratory, “the whole [was] necessarily 
different from its parts.”22 Similarly, the remixer carefully crafts novel mashups intended 
to be greater than their constituent samples. As it was with creative imitation, novelty 
is also crucial to remix; a mashup could not be classified as such unless it were suffi -
ciently novel. It contains the remixer’s unifying voice, despite the fact that the mashup 
46
S. H. CHURCHis composed of other songs entirely. Due to its levels of novelty and holism, elevated 
imitatio  does not resemble the pejorative Romantic concept of imitation.
Sampling
Sampling as a musical practice rejects linear order and focuses instead on aesthetic 
appropriateness, which is governed by opportune timing, or kairos . Isocrates favored 
kairos  in his rhetoric, proclaiming “oratory is good only if it has the qualities of fitness 
for the occasion, propriety of style, and originality of treatment.”23 This belief in “fitness 
for the occasion” also permeates contemporary remixes, especially when a remixer 
searches for an appropriate sample to use in a song. This ability to find two songs that 
blend well together is important for remix artists, especially in live situations where they 
more immediately adapt to their audiences.24 Essentially, contemporary sampling works 
in tandem with classical imitatio . Instead of exerting the requisite mimetic labor as in the 
traditional imitation model, remixers productively interpret the samples they use in 
their mashups, thereby creatively modifying the samples for their use in a new context. 
Remixers engender kairos  in their mashups to an even greater degree than Isocrates, as 
a sample will likely be placed in a certain portion of a mashup exclusively because it 
“sounds good” or that it “fits” in that place. By making ostensibly incongruous samples 
fit together, remixers also use the rhetorical strategies novelty  and surprise —both of 
which can be observed in the mashups of Girl Talk. This primacy of appropriateness 
defines much of the aesthetic structure of mashups.
The remix artist’s focus on appropriateness also parallels the classical belief that prob -
ability is more important than chronology. Classical rhetorician Takis Poulakos explains,
To be artistic, a sequence of events must be governed by probability: one epi -
sode must follow because  of another, not merely after another. Without probabil -
ity, art loses its essential quality, since it is clear that “a poet’s object is not to 
tell what actually happened but what could and would happen either probably 
or inevitably.”25
In line with the Isocratic belief that kairos  should dictate how discourse is crafted, prob -
ability is essential to musical sampling. Remixers choose samples that will fit together 
naturally in a way that, hopefully, encourages the listener to recognize their congruity. 
In other words, the listener will appreciate a good mashup, in part, because the smooth 
layering and musical similarities of the source samples emphasize their fit for the mashup. 
As Joanna Demers writes, “Materials that might have different tempi, rhythms, or keys 
are mixed in such a way as to make their combination seem necessary, almost inevita -
ble.”26 Sampling manipulates the elements of the songs to align with each other, thus 
revealing their occluded congruity.
Isocrates participated in a discursive type of sampling that shared similarities with 
remix, particularly in its kairotic  production, repetition, and transitions. Regarding kai-
ros, he considered sampling to be a productive concept, proclaiming, “we should regard 
that man as the most accomplished in this field who can collect the greatest number of 
ideas scattered among the thoughts of all the rest and present them in the best form.”27 
Likewise, musical sampling is usually decided by the use-value of the samples, without 
regard to copyright or other factors. Isocrates appears to have brought in samples of  
other speeches in his own, using what helped him make his particular points. He 
47
A RHETORIC OF REMIXconsidered his work to be a “mixed discourse,”28 composed of samplings of his own words 
from previous works as well as the words from others. In Antidosis , for example, Isocrates 
sampled not only his own writings but also those of Homer, Thucydides, and Socrates; in 
fact, it is essentially considered a remix of Plato’s Apology .29 This most important of 
Isocrates’s works was a fictional trial in which he was charged to defend himself. In doing 
so, he argued that sampling allows him the easiest route for building his case for himself:
I am charged with offending by my words, I think that I shall be in a better 
position to make you see the truth; for I shall present in evidence the actual 
words which I have spoken and written, so that you will vote upon my dis -
courses, not from conjecture, but with clear knowledge of their nature. I can -
not, however, present them all in complete form; for the time which has been 
allowed me is too short. But just as is done with fruits, I shall try to produce a 
sample of each kind. For when you have heard a small portion of them you will 
easily recognize my true character and appreciate the force of all my speeches.30
Isocrates, then, used discursive samples so that the audience could be aware of only his best 
and most representative work. Though not explicitly, this objective informs contemporary 
mashup culture as well; in particular, a song may be sampled because it is representative of 
an entire genre of music or a musical movement31 or a name may be chosen because of its 
cultural connotations. Experimental artists the Tape-beatles, for example, named them -
selves as homage to the studio recording techniques of their appropriated-and-transformed 
namesake.32 Music also has a powerful ability to represent emotions and it is perhaps even 
more effective than language for this purpose. Thus, for a remixer to sample a particular 
song allows him or her the unique ability to economically cull certain emotions from its 
audience. Or, the associations may resonate simply because they are gleaned from the 
“shared cultural resonance” of certain recordings.33 In either case, remixers follow Isocrates 
by selecting only the best and most representative samples.
Isocrates’s use of repetition and smooth transitions demonstrates a range of his rhetori -
cal strategies that also mirror current sampling practices. In several of his discourses, 
Isocrates used both verbal and thematic repetition, unapologetically repeating past 
statements he had used previously—sometimes verbatim.34 Repetition in oratory, after 
all, breeds a sense of familiarity to the audience with the ideas being expressed, thus 
“disarm[ing] readers and render[ing] them receptive.”35 Repetition also functions peda -
gogically. The orator can employ it with the objective of helping the audience remember 
and ultimately learn through its recall.36 In a musical context, repetition is key for struc -
tural reinforcement; through recurring motifs, themes, and lyrics, the music is commu -
nicated to the listener as a bona fide song. Because repetition is foundational to pop 
music, remixers strategically employ it in remixing as well. Naturally, repetition entails 
important aesthetic choices for the sample to work. If the remixer wants to make the 
mashup sound palatable, he or she will use repetition to mimic the structure of pop 
music. In the case of samples, remixers often choose to flip the “figure/ground” distinc -
tion of a song.37 This variation might entail that a drumbeat or looping bass line used in 
the background be grafted on top of another song’s melodies. If a figure is to be “demoted” 
to the ground of another song, it must be looped continually throughout the song in 
order for it to achieve a semblance of the traditionally steady and constant ground. 
Thus, the listener can be reminded that the remix is a holistic musical statement like a 
pop song.
48
S. H. CHURCHIsocrates also used smoothing transitions between discursive samples. At times, his 
source materials were quite fragmented and thus required a fluency with transitioning 
in order to make his discourses sound unified. George Norlin, a translator and editor 
of many of Isocrates’s works, argued that Isocrates’s ease with language betrayed an 
aptitude for creating beautiful prose that subordinated words to a larger unifying 
force.38 In employing this holistic perspective, Isocrates paid particular notice to craft -
ing syntactic connections, taking “infinite pains with composition—the smooth join -
ing of part to part,” thus creating a pleasurable final discursive product.39 One of his 
major contributions was the periodic sentence, a linking of multiple words and phrases 
that, in lesser hands, would appear to be an ugly conglomeration to disrupt the flow 
of the argument. However, these long periodic sentences—often comprising half of a 
written page—were crafted to a degree that suppressed their fragmentation and ampli -
fied their unity.40 Isocrates had the vision to inject artistry into his speech, which was 
executed through his ability to transition effectively. A remixer similarly needs to 
make aesthetic choices in order to aggregate many disparate samples and craft a uni -
fied final product larger than the samples contained therein. This holism and other 
Isocratic techniques are exemplified in the mashups of the remix artist Gregg Gillis, 
also known as Girl Talk.
Isocratic Rhetoric and Girl Talk’s Mashups
The same tools rhetoricians use to produce and understand public address can also be 
employed to think through the implications of remix. One of the principal components 
of rhetoric, invention, is essential to both the traditional orator and the contemporary 
remix artist. For the classical orator, imitation yielded invention.41 For the contemporary 
remixer, invention fosters creativity. By harnessing kairos  as inventive inspiration for 
their mashups, remixers also unleash other important elements of invention, novelty  and 
surprise .
Track five from Girl Talk’s All Day , “This Is The Remix,”42 clearly demonstrates rhe -
torical invention at work in remix. Early in the mashup, Bananarama’s 1980s hit “Cruel 
Summer” is featured prominently along with Justin Timberlake, Lady Gaga, and Diddy—
Dirty Money on top. Certainly the incongruities of the songs stem from the decades in 
which they were released, but the shared embrace of the genre of pop ties each together. 
An interlude from Genesis’s 1980s smash “Tonight, Tonight, Tonight” follows, then Lil’ 
Kim and Snoop Dogg’s drum beats (featured in different songs) are sampled over the top 
of The Jackson 5’s bass-driven “I Want You Back.” And yet, surprisingly (is there any 
other way?), the 1970s R&B standard (with the help of Beastie Boys and a few others) 
transitions into Toadies’s 1990s grunge rocker “Possum Kingdom.” After a full minute 
and a half of Toadies (a veritable lifetime in the frenetic sampling world of Girl Talk), 
the closing strains of distorted guitar seamlessly segue into the pseudo-tribal rhythms of 
Simon and Garfunkel’s “Cecilia.” But where the a cappella sing-along break of “Cecilia” 
takes place, the drums are replaced by the rhythms from the introduction of U2’s 
“Sunday Bloody Sunday.” The match between both songs is so similar that once the 
original beat returns, both songs still overlap seamlessly. “Get Low” by Lil Jon and the 
East Side Boyz (feat. Ying Yang T wins), functions as binding glue here, offering vocal 
exclamations across the multiple samples and ensuring that the listener is still able to 
make the transition comfortably along with the mashup. In the next ten seconds, the 
mashup transports Grateful Dead’s psychedelic rock of “Casey Jones” directly into 
49
A RHETORIC OF REMIXINXS’s new wave sensation “Need You Tonight.” Again, the transition is made possible 
by Gillis’s immaculate layering; when one song transitions into another, the ongoing 
layers of complementary samples bridge the musical gap. In the closing seconds of the 
mashup, INXS’s groove is supplemented by the sneeze-like yell that signifies The Clash’s 
“Should I Stay or Should I Go,” along with some LL Cool J thrown in for good measure. 
“This is The Remix,” indeed.
This representative mashup indicates that few of these samples exist in any definable 
or predictable system. They are as disparate as Gillis’s taste for music is eclectic. Indeed, 
many of the samples that play concurrently originated from clearly opposing genres. 
Still, when they are mashed up in such a manner, the connections seem natural. Because 
the DJ reframes the dissonance of clashing artists and genres as consonant by layering 
them together congruously, the clash is still apparent at an abstract level, but the listener 
can simultaneously oscillate from one sample to another.
“This is the Remix” also exhibits Gillis’s use of novelty and surprise, each key compo -
nents of rhetorical and aesthetic invention.43 Enlightenment philosopher George 
Campbell wrote that a speech done properly will “excite in the mind an agreeable sur -
prise, and that arising, not from anything marvelous in the subject, but solely from the 
imagery she employs, or the strange assemblage of related ideas presented to the mind.”44 
Notable here is Campbell’s statement that the audience will be delighted by the “strange 
assemblage of related ideas” presented by the orator; the literal application of these 
words to remix showcases how the practice sees novelty as essential to its persuasive 
ends. What is a mashup other than a “strange assemblage of related ideas”? In his related 
assemblage of strange ideas, bolstered by a relentless beat throughout, Girl Talk’s mash -
ups follow Isocratic practices of imitatio  and sampling. Gillis’s creative interpretation and 
variation of the source materials lead to the novelty and surprise of those mashups and 
thus their rhetorical potency.
Aesthetically speaking, Gillis’s deliberate musical heresies have their purposes. In 
part, they are analogous to the functions of avant-garde art in that each of them ques -
tions the arbitrary classifications of art. Moreover—and more importantly to our digital 
age of information superabundance—these texts vie for our attention. A good remix 
artist will use invention to create a novel mashup, thereby grabbing our attention. Here’s 
how it works: when Gillis mashes up incongruous samples, he not only persuades the 
audience that the clashing songs belong together, he does so through their congruity, 
thus erasing the dissonance embedded in the very idea of sampling. This strategy is 
reminiscent of a model of argumentation in which the orator is responsible for using 
language in a way to create a version of reality that will support whichever arguments 
he or she is constructing. Provocatively, Kenneth Burke describes the process in this 
way: “Even if any terminology is a reflection  of reality, by its very nature as a terminology 
it must be a selection  of reality; and to this extent it must also function as a deflection  of 
reality.”45 Orators select from a wide array of arguments in their creative process to 
reflect reality as they select it (or desire the audience to see it), while choosing which 
aspects to deflect away from the audience’s collective consciousness. Thus, the orator’s 
task of using this dissuasive  function of argumentative discourse is to move the audience 
to accept certain ideas while rejecting others as unacceptable.
Like rhetoric, remix also reflects, selects, and deflects reality. When the artist com -
poses a remix, she or he is responsible for choosing the appropriate voices to be sampled 
and the parts of the composition to be added upon or subtracted from. This element of 
the remix process has spawned a subclassification called selective remix .46 The process is 
50
S. H. CHURCHtricky to maneuver because remixers must allow the original essence of the song to 
remain intact and yet transform it sufficiently to be considered something novel. Remix 
artists will consider the final product successful if they, like orators, can sustain the audi -
ence’s attention as well as help persuade it that the aesthetic choices were appropriate.
The practice of selecting samples by their “due appropriateness to the [mashup] at 
hand”47 is a contemporary application of the Isocratic notion of kairos . Gillis’s selection 
of samples is based on their aesthetic appropriateness for the overall mashup, without 
explicit regard to potential ethical or legal issues.48 However, this kairotic  imperative 
presents a disjunction between kairos  and the generic clash of the source materials: 
strictly based on their origins, these samples were never really considered that appropri -
ate to be paired in the first place. Still, the belief that all materials are available for the 
benefit of art, culled from the open source ideology of the digital era, presents the chal -
lenge to make something beautiful and unified out of something so fragmented. Thus, 
despite the apparent disconnect between the belief in appropriateness and the clashing 
genres of the music, Girl Talk samples the sources anyway. Once the mashup is com -
plete, it exhibits the elements of novelty and surprise to enhance the rhetorical function 
of its aesthetics. Girl Talk’s mashups, facilitated by his process of imitative invention, 
function rhetorically by sublimating ethical issues into their transcendent aesthetic pres -
entations via their strategic use of congruity.
In conclusion, this chapter has demonstrated a few ways that remix can be rhetorical. 
In using either remix or rhetoric to examine the other, both become mutually eluci -
dated. Like the classical concept of invention, remix also uses classical rhetoric resources 
like imitatio  and kairos . In this case study, I gestured to the rhetorical potential of remix 
by analyzing the aesthetic dimensions of one of Girl Talk’s mashups. In his successful 
employment of imitatio , kairos , repetition, smoothing transitions, novelty, and surprise 
in his mashups, Gregg Gillis performs Isocratic rhetoric in a digital context and therefore 
demonstrates, perhaps ironically, that remix is not a new or strictly technological 
practice.
Notes
 1 Isocrates, Antidosis , in Isocrates Volume II , trans. and ed. George Norlin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1929), 191 (emphasis added).
 2 Gregg Gillis, quoted in Greg Kot, Ripped: How the Wired Generation Revolutionized Music  (New York: 
Scribner, 2009), 166.
 3 Margie Borschke argues that Lawrence Lessig’s conception of remix reveals a bias of cyber-utopianism. 
Lessig sees the practice to be new and digital, both of which Borschke challenges. See Margie Borschke, 
“Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix,” Media International Australia  141 (November 2011): 17–25.
 4 Thomas Pettitt, “Before the Gutenberg Parenthesis: Elizabethan-American Compatibilities,” 2. Paper 
presented at MIT5: Creativity, Ownership, and Collaboration in the Digital Age, April 27–29, 2007, 
http://web.mit.edu/comm-forum/mit5/papers/pettitt_plenary_gutenberg.pdf.
 5 This definition comes from the classical Roman rhetorician Quintilian. Peter Ramus, Arguments in Rhetoric 
Against Quintilian: Translation and Text of Peter Ramus’s Rhetoricae Distinctiones in Quintilianum, ed. James 
J. Murphy, trans. Carole Newlands (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010), 109.
 6 Richard Lanham, The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts  (Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press, 1993), 227.
 7 Richard Lanham, Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of Information (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2006), 21.
 8 Lanham, Economics of Attention , 25.
 9 Roderick P . Hart and Suzanne M. Daughton, Modern Rhetorical Criticism , 3rd ed. (Boston, MA: Allyn & 
Bacon, 2005), 2.
51
A RHETORIC OF REMIX10 Lanham, Economics of Attention , xii–xiii.
11 Regarding the influence of Isocrates, George Norlin wrote: “[F]ew if any of the literary men of [Isocrates’] 
age, whether or not they were members of his school, were unaffected by his influence.” George Norlin, 
“General Introduction,” in Isocrates Volume I , ed. and trans. George Norlin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1928), xxix.
12 Kathleen E. Welch, Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New Literacy  (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999), 37.
13 John Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention in Antiquity: An Historical-Theoretical Revision,” 
Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric  21, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 65.
14 Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention,” 62.
15 Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention,” 67.
16 Quintilian, quoted in Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention,” 69.
17 DJs frequently use the music from artists and songs they admire and, in sampling it, want to pay tribute 
to the “greatness” of that particular song. Eduardo Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling 
Culture,” in Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss (New York: Springer, 2010), 166.
18 Quoted in Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola, Creative License: The Law and Cultural of Digital Sampling  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 194.
19 Takis Poulakos, “Isocrates’s Use of Narrative in the Evagoras : Epideictic Rhetoric and Moral Action,” 
Quarterly Journal of Speech  73 (August 1987): 323.
20 Robert Hariman, “Civic Education, Classical Imitation, and Democratic Polity,” in Isocrates and Civic 
Education , ed. Takis Poulakos and David Depew (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2004), 229.
21 Hariman, “Civic Education,” 230.
22 Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention,” 75.
23 Isocrates, Against the Sophists , in Isocrates Volume II , trans. and ed. George Norlin (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1929), 171. Though my discussion only focuses on Isocrates’s use of kairos , he 
was greatly influenced by his teacher Gorgias, who is credited as the progenitor of the concept.
24 John Shiga, “Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-up Culture,” Critical Studies in Media Communication  
24, no. 2 (June 2007): 103.
25 Poulakos, “ Evagoras ,” 324. Poulakos’s quotation marks indicate a cited passage from Aristotle’s The Poetics , 
trans. W . Hamilton Fyfe. Loeb Classical Library (London: Heinemann, 1927), ix.
26 Joanna Demers, Listening Through the Noise: The Aesthetics of Experimental Electronic Music  (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2010), 57.
27 Isocrates, To Nicocles , in Isocrates Volume I , ed. and trans. George Norlin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1928), 63.
28 Isocrates, Antidosis,  191. The fact that Isocrates’s discursive use of (what we consider today to be) mashup 
logic appears as an anachronism again reveals the classical rhetoric roots of remix. It is the juxtaposition 
of the classical and the contemporary in Isocratic thought that, to Kathleen Welch, “puts him in a crucial 
place intellectually” (Welch, Electric Rhetoric , 38).
29 Isocrates quotes from Homer and Socrates in Against the Sophists , and echoes some of Thucydides’s work 
in Antidosis . For further examples of Isocrates sampling Socrates, see Antidosis , pages 215, 237, and 365. 
For the argument that Isocrates remixed Plato, see Robert J. Bonner, “The Legal Setting of Isocrates’ 
Antidosis ,” Classical Philology 15 (April 1920): 193. Bonner cites other scholars who have noticed a resem -
blance between both works, and that Antidosis  contains a number of parallel passages to Apology . Yun Lee 
Too argues that Isocrates cites Plato in Antidosis “extensively and obviously.” Yun Lee Too, A Commentary 
on Isocrates’  Antidosis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 24.
30 Isocrates, Antidosis , 215, 217.
31 A particular type of remix, which Eduardo Navas calls the “megamix,” has the objective of sampling songs 
that are particularly representative of an entire time period. Navas, “Regressive Mashups,” 166.
32 McLeod and DiCola, Creative License , 41.
33 Ibid., 101.
34 Welch, Electric Rhetoric , 38. Yun Lee Too, citing another study, gives citations from six of Isocrates’s works 
that demonstrate his affinity for repetition. Yun Lee Too, The Rhetoric of Identity in Isocrates: Text, Power, 
Pedagogy  (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 53.
35 Too, The Rhetoric of Identity , 54.
36 Eric A. Havelock explains that in the classical era, “the task of the poetic education [was] to memo -
rise and recall.” Eric A. Havelock, Preface to Plato  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1963), 207.
52
S. H. CHURCH37 Aram Sinnreich, Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of the Configurable Culture  (Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010), 87.
38 Norlin, “General Introduction,” xv.
39 Norlin, “General Introduction,” xv.
40 Norlin, “General Introduction,” xvi.
41 Muckelbauer, “Imitation and Invention,” 74.
42 The following description may be located at http://www.mashupbreakdown.com (accessed June 19, 
2013), and clicking on track 5.
43 When discussing modern aesthetics, Umberto Eco speaks about “novelty” and “innovation” synony -
mously, arguing that aesthetic value is assessed in a work of art, in part, by the amount of novelty the 
artist exhibited. See Umberto Eco, “Innovation and Repetition: Between Modern and Postmodern 
Aesthetics,” Daedalus 134 (2005): 191, 200.
44 George Campbell, The Philosophy of Rhetoric , originally published in 1776. Located in The Rhetoric of Blair, 
Campbell, and Whately , ed. James L. Golden and Edward P . J. Corbett (New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1968), 150.
45 Kenneth Burke, Language as Symbolic Action  (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1966), 45 
(emphases are Burke’s).
46 Navas, “Regressive and ReflexiveMashups,” 159.
47 This quotation remixes Isocrates’s justification of his kairotic  philosophy in Antidosis , 191. The original 
word that has been bracketed out and replaced by “mashup” is “subject.”
48 If I carry on the investigation of the parallels of Girl Talk’s contemporary philosophy with the classical 
pedagogy of Isocrates, interesting points emerge. For example, Isocrates avoided teaching ethics, virtue, 
or justice because he believed that these lofty and abstract concepts were outside of his more pragmatic 
objectives in his teachings. Expanding this idea to remix culture, there is a possibility that the same logic 
informs Girl Talk. The expense of acquiring rights to hundreds of samples would run Gillis in the red to 
the tune of many millions of dollars. Thus, taking legal considerations into account is simply beyond the 
scope of Gillis and his relatively modest record label. He generally allows his releases to be downloaded 
for free and would not have the financial wherewithal to recoup his losses.
Bibliography
Bonner, Robert J. “The Legal Setting of Isocrates’ Antidosis .” Classical Philology 15 (April 1920):  
193–197.
Borschke, Margie. “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.” Media International Australia  141 (November 
2011): 17–25.
Burke, Kenneth. Language as Symbolic Action . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1966.
Campbell, George. “The Philosophy of Rhetoric.” In  The Rhetoric of Blair, Campbell, and Whately . 
Edited by James L. Golden and Edward P . J. Corbett, 145–271. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and 
Winston, 1968.
Demers, Joanna. Listening Through the Noise: The Aesthetics of Experimental Electronic Music . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2010.
Eco, Umberto. “Innovation and Repetition: Between Modern and Postmodern Aesthetics.” Daedalus 
134 (2005): 191–207.
Hariman, Robert. “Civic Education, Classical Imitation, and Democratic Polity.” In Isocrates and Civic 
Education . Edited by Takis Poulakos and David Depew, 217–234. Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press, 2004.
Hart, Roderick P ., and Suzanne M. Daughton. Modern Rhetorical Criticism . 3rd ed. Boston, MA: Allyn 
& Bacon, 2005.
Havelock, Eric A. Preface to Plato . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1963.
Isocrates. To Nicocles . In Isocrates Volume I . Edited and translated by George Norlin, 37–71. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1928.
———. Against the Sophists . In Isocrates Volume II . Edited and translated by George Norlin, 159–77. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1929.
———. Antidosis . In Isocrates Volume II . Edited and translated by George Norlin, 179–365. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1929.
53
A RHETORIC OF REMIXKot, Greg. Ripped: How the Wired Generation Revolutionized Music . New York, NY: Scribner, 2009.
Lanham, Richard. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts . Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 1993.
———. Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of Information . Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 2006.
McLeod, Kembrew, and Peter DiCola, Creative License: The Law and Cultural of Digital Sampling . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Muckelbauer, John. “Imitation and Invention in Antiquity: An Historical-Theoretical Revision.”  
Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric 21, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 61–88.
Navas, Eduardo. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” In Mashup Cultures . Edited 
by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 157–177. New York: Springer, 2010.
Norlin, George. “General Introduction.” In Isocrates Volume I . Edited and translated by George Norlin, 
ix–li. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Pettitt, Thomas. “Before the Gutenberg Parenthesis: Elizabethan-American Compatibilities.” Paper 
presented at MIT5: Creativity, Ownership, and Collaboration in the Digital Age, April 27–29, 
2007, http://web.mit.edu/comm-forum/mit5/papers/pettitt_plenary_gutenberg.pdf.
Poulakos, Takis. “Isocrates’s Use of Narrative in the Evagoras : Epideictic Rhetoric and Moral Action.” 
Quarterly Journal of Speech  73 (August 1987): 317–328.
Ramus, Peter. Arguments in Rhetoric Against Quintilian: Translation and Text of Peter Ramus’s Rhetoricae 
Distinctiones in Quintilianum. Edited by James J. Murphy. Translated by Carole Newlands. 
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010.
Schaeffer, John D. Sensus Communis: Vico, Rhetoric, and the Limits of Relativism . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1990.
Shiga, John. “Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-up Culture.” Critical Studies in Media Communication  
24, vol. 2 (June 2007): 93–114.
Sinnreich, Aram. Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of Configurable Culture . Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010.
Timmerman, David M., and Edward Schiappa. Classical Greek Rhetorical Theory and the Disciplining of 
Discourse . Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Too, Yun Lee. The Rhetoric of Identity in Isocrates: Text, Power, Pedagogy . New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1995.
———. A Commentary on Isocrates’ Antidosis. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Welch, Kathleen E. Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New Literacy . Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999.
3
GOOD ARTISTS COPY;  
GREAT ARTISTS STEAL1
Reflections on Cut-Copy-Paste Culture
Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss
Remix culture is highly dependent on the abundance of cultural production and access 
to media objects by a large community. From an economic and organizational perspec -
tive, cultural artifacts in the broadest sense need to be inexpensive, widely distributed 
and easily accessible. This basically means that the individual gains the right to work 
on the source material without becoming endangered by infringements of laws or 
taboos.
From a historical point of view the accumulated body of recorded works of human art 
and knowledge was first achieved through the expansion of the printing press, which 
laid the foundation for the development of early modern science in the seventeenth 
century. A new self-conception in dealing with texts arose from discernible naming of 
authors, printers, page numbers and publishing years. Hence texts could be clearly ref -
erenced, which in turn served as the basis for creating new knowledge through critical 
review and supplementation of information.
These interweaving processes of combining existing and new material became a major 
principle and coercive element in scientific argumentation. Scientific publications 
always selectively refer to other scholarly works from which new schools and discourses 
evolve. New findings and knowledge bear on individual yet reproducible empirical 
knowledge—a supposition that is still controversial to this day. The development of the 
printing press made possible the standardization and comparison of text production in 
a freer and more critical way, and the possibility of simply transferring, for instance, a 
loss-free quotation from one sign vehicle to another, enabled a very early form of remix 
culture. Many of the punctuation conventions 
we know derive from this period, for example, 
how a quotation can be modified so that it 
remains a direct quote while seamlessly fitting 
into a new text.
In the late nineteenth century when the 
first reproduction of a photograph with a full 
tonal range in a newspaper was introduced, a 
new chapter in the mass diffusion of images See Chapter 41  for Kevin 
Atherton’s discussion on com -
bining existing and new video 
footage of himself, spanning 
decades, in what becomes a 
recombinatory installation of self-
driven questions and answers.
55
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALwas opened. The newly developed reprographic technique allowed parallel printing of 
text and photographs that enhanced the qualitative and quantitative aspects of image 
reproduction in a flourishing printing culture.
Early experiments with direct-contact printing of objects placed on photographic 
plates, double exposures, and composite pictures made by darkroom masking were popu -
lar during the Victorian era. It was William Fox Talbot who, in 1834–35, first experi -
mented with the light sensitivity of silver salts that allowed him to develop the first 
contact printing of objects—mostly ferns, leaves, lace and drawings—onto sensitized 
plates.
Talbot’s pictures, which he called photogenic drawings , were rediscovered in the 
1920s by artists such as Man Ray and Lászl ó Moholy-Nagy, who further experi -
mented with the photogram technique. During the late nineteenth century a variety 
of playful encounters with composite photographic portraits developed into a form 
of entertainment using newspapers. This early form of trick photography became 
extremely popular—comic postcards, photograph albums, screens, and military 
mementos all made use of the techniques of cutting out and reassembling photo -
graphic images.2
The rise of montage as a central element in modern art is, however, in comparison to 
postcards, less technically motivated; it is rather more understandable as an attempt to 
develop a new aesthetics that echoed the progressing subjectivization in industrialized 
cities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.3
The newly introduced form of real montage replaced the concept of linearity with 
simultaneity, velocity, and multiplicity of sequences of events, suggesting one of the core 
subjects in the twentieth century avant-garde: the extension of the human sensory appa -
ratus by means of aleatoric and technologically enhanced artistic procedures in search 
of new areas of experiences, in which the borders between the so-called inner-world and 
outer-world would eventually dissolve (as depicted for example in Max Ernst’s collages). 
Collage techniques as applied by the Surrealists are encounters between heterogeneous 
elements, attesting in their entirety to the incompatibility of the two worlds—“as beau -
tiful as the random encounter between an umbrella and a sewing-machine upon a dis -
secting-table.”4 What unites diverse early modernist avant-garde manifestos is the desire 
to create an alternative model to the reality of the ordinary everyday to reach a state of 
absolute power of desire and dream.
Correspondingly, Eisenstein’s famous quote “montage is conflict”5 points to a con -
flict where new ideas emerge from the collision of the montage sequence (i.e., in 
synthesis) but where the new emerging ideas are not innate in any of the images of 
the edited sequence.
Using the example of Italian futurist painter and composer Luigi Russolo, who wrote 
the manifesto The Art of Noises (1916), we can see that the early twentieth century 
avant-garde challenged the whole faculty of human sensory experience. Russolo argued 
that the human ear has become accustomed to the speed, energy, and noise of the urban 
industrial soundscape and thus this new sonic palette requires a new approach to musical 
instrumentation and composition. He proposed a number of conclusions about how 
electronics and other technology would allow futurist musicians to “substitute for the 
limited variety of timbres that the orchestra possesses today the infinite variety of tim -
bres in noises, reproduced with appropriate mechanisms.”6 Nevertheless it was an ardu -
ous path for Russolo to design and construct a number of noise-generating devices, and 
to assemble a noise orchestra to perform with them.
56
S. SONVILLA-WEISSFrom Russolo’s manifesto it took another 30 years, along with the invention of the 
tape recorder, to separate the sound object ( objet sonore ) from the body of sound ( corps 
sonore )—a concept coined by the French composer and theoretician Pierre Schaeffer 
(1910–95). He is mainly recognized for his accomplishments in electronic and experi -
mental music, notably in his role as the chief developer of an early form of avant-garde 
music known as musique concrète . Other than in classical music, which starts with an 
abstraction (i.e., musical notation), musique concrète  refers to the use of sound as a pri -
mary compositional resource. Soon after, the core elements of sampling were introduced, 
such as loops, variable running speed and direction, multitracks, crossfades and cuts.
During the mid-1950s Brion Gysin and William Burroughs used so-called “cut-up tech -
niques”—an aleatory literary technique in which a text is cut up and rearranged to create a 
new text. The quite obvious Dadaist precedent of this technique can be traced back to 
Tristan Tzara’s generic instructions from the 1920s on how to create poems by shuffling the 
words of a newspaper article. Yet both Gysin and Burroughs were not so much interested in 
the individual subconscious than exploring the collective as a kind of parallel and expanded 
reality or, as Burroughs proposes, “When you cut into the present the future leaks out.”7
At about the same time, artists experimented with found footage from B-movies, 
newsreels, and promotional and educational films, whereby A Movie  (1958) from 
American beat artist Bruce Conner became one of the aesthetically significant examples 
in the collage film genre. In his film the tragic and the absurd coexist within the same 
split-second, whereas the process of selection and combination of horizontal and vertical 
montage triggers narrative associations.
In contrast to the noncritical relationship between montage and commerce in 
American pop art, the Situationist International movement (1957–72) proposed the 
technique of détournement , which “turns expressions of the capitalist system and its 
media culture against itself.”8 In A User’s Guide to Détournement Guy Debord and Gil 
Wolman proposed that:
Any elements, no matter where they are taken from, can be used to make new 
combinations  . . . The mutual interference of two worlds of feeling, or the jux -
taposition of two independent expressions, supersedes the original elements and 
produces a synthetic organization of greater efficacy. Anything can be used.9
However, this programmatic take on radical appropriation involved a certain risk of 
entanglement in the self-imposed logics of artistic subcultures. It was only with the rise 
of the Internet and the multiplicity of digital information in various media formats that 
the structural conditions of the prevalent, dominant high culture and market-driven 
cultural industry were fundamentally altered.
No Man Is an Island
In an attempt to systematize musical borrowing as a pervasive cultural phenomenon over 
centuries, Peter Burkholder10 has delineated the field and outlined a tentative typology 
of procedures for using existing music in new works. In seeking to define and delimit the 
vast field of musical borrowing, Burkholder defines it broadly as “taking something from 
an existing piece of music and using it in a new piece.” Subsequently, the borrowed and 
reworked music must be sufficiently individual to be identifiable as coming from a par -
ticular work, rather than from a general repertoire.
57
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALYet in order to distinguish the history of musical borrowing from the history of com -
positional and improvisational practice, Burkholder concludes that it is best to focus 
on borrowing from specific works and to consider allusion to general repertoires,  
or even to the styles of individual composers, as closely related but different phenom -
ena. For example, it is impossible to trace every instance of stylistic allusion in Mozart’s 
or Rachmaninoff’s work, as it would require writing about virtually every one of his 
pieces.
Using the example of T. S. Eliot’s11 pertinent lines in his essay about Philip Massinger, 
a contemporary of William Shakespeare, he comes to the conclusion that, “Immature 
poets imitate; mature poets steal”—a statement which, ironically, has proven itself in 
various permutations such as Picasso’s “Good artists copy; great artists steal” or 
Stravinsky’s “Lesser artists borrow; great artists steal.” Eliot’s assertion to obliterate pro -
venience expands as he continues: “A good poet will usually borrow from authors remote 
in time, or alien in language, or diverse in interest.”
Coming back to current remix practices—which, by nature are inclined to these bor -
rowings—Arewa12 rather succinctly points out that the pervasive nature of borrowing 
in music suggests that more careful consideration needs to be given to the extent to 
which copying and borrowing have been, and can be, a source of innovation. Existing 
copyright frameworks need to recognize and incorporate musical borrowing by develop -
ing commercial practices and liability rule-based legal structures for music that uses 
existing works in its creation.
Individuality to Collective Authorship
Descartes’s cogito ergo sum —the certainty of one’s own thinking as a priori knowledge of 
the world—emblematically gets to the heart of the bourgeois-liberal concept of subjec -
tivity. Against this background, the philosophical models that emerged from introspec -
tion-based creativity subsequently laid the normative basis for the European concept of 
authors’ rights. These notions were popularized by cliché ideas about artistic creation 
such as the struggle of the author with the blank sheet or the artist in front of the white 
canvas. No matter what the deconstruction of this everlasting myth has revealed, the 
cliché prevails, in this case as a crude form that will be shaped by the artist’s innermost 
vision.
In the highly specialized cultural industry (digital media art and business) of the 
twenty-first century, hardly anyone attempts to speak about the solitary work of the  
artist. Yet still, the concept of introspection as a source of creativity is maintained through 
either hierarchical organization or decision-making amalgamated in a single person, as, for 
example, the film director or producer (especially the film auteur). Precisely because these 
clichés are deemed inappropriate, cultural industries take advantage of them.
The practice of remix, implicitly or explicitly, pursues a different concept of creativity. 
It does not foreground the inwardness of the autonomous individual but rather the het -
erogeneity and excitement of a variety of different stakeholders whose ideas are brought 
out in synchronous, asynchronous, and serial forms of collaboration.
Synchronous forms of communication, for instance, are utilized by musicians for 
whom real-time encounters support spontaneous improvisation and dialog. At the 
beginning of such a process a mere loose framework exists to stimulate a kind of creative 
leeway eventually leading to an agreeable result. This, however, is no longer attributable 
to distinguishable contributions, but rather generated through vital interaction among 
58
S. SONVILLA-WEISSthe participants. As a consequence, synchronous modes of communication and collabo -
ration accommodate small groups that are flexible while using ubiquitous technologies. 
Wikipedia exemplifies an asynchronous form of collaborative communication. The 
main principle is quite simple: one person edits a media object created by another per -
son, who in return reedits the newly generated version.
At any point in time there is only one version of the media object that is continuously 
worked upon by the community. The collective work of Wikipedia has become a reliable 
information resource built on the voluntary work of thousands of individuals whose 
contributions are reliant on peer review, version tracking, and chronological order.
Serial Collaboration
A widely popular practice in cultural and artistic fields is the serial form of collaboration 
in which a piece of work emerges from successive elaboration by creative coworkers. 
This working method essentially differs from the reworking mode of existing media 
objects, as it foregrounds the creative and transformative process of adding something 
genuinely new to the existing. Transferring this collaborative form into remix practices 
enables both the producer of the source material and the remixer to act independently. 
In this sense collaboration works without spatial or temporal constraints, as the presence 
of the originator of the source material is no longer required.
Commonly, serial collaboration is less about enhancement of existing work than  
playful alterations and transformations. Although this operational mode occasionally 
privileges a distinctive idiosyncratic note of single authorship, the collaborative aspects 
continue to exist in analysis and dialog with the classics.
One of the first empirical studies on serial collaboration was conducted by 
Cheliotis and Yew13 who investigated user behaviors in the ccMixter online com -
munity. The community had collectively produced an impressive 7,484 music items 
at the time of the data collection. This output has been considered quite respectable 
in regard to the relatively small size of the community and the fact that the produc -
tion of a music sample or complete piece (even if it is a remix) is generally more 
time consuming than the taking of an amateur photograph or the creation (or edit -
ing) of a Wikipedia entry.
Another finding was that remixing accounts for more than half of the total produc -
tion volume (3,982 items, or 53 percent), even if about 60 percent of all uploaded origi -
nal music pieces (2,150 of 3,502) never get remixed. This is suggestive of the central 
role that reuse can play in digital media production. Interestingly samples that hold a 
strong degree of remix are less attractive as a base material for new pieces, probably 
because it is difficult to capture small parts that can be later used as samples. Thus, 
diverse forms of collaboration constitute an essential element of remix culture inasmuch 
as individuality is confronted with the collective. As a result, new forms of subjectivity 
arise. The polarity between predominantly twentieth century thinking of either indi -
viduality or collectivity is outdated; instead a single individuality emerges only in rela -
tion to other individualities. As an example, the various Wikipedia versions permit 
much more detailed access to individual entries composing the collectively authored 
article than acknowledgements in print publications would ever be able to do. Both 
individuality and collectivity are no longer the opposite: on the contrary, they form the 
basis of coevolving principles in networking culture.
59
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALEverything Is Connected
Potentially everything could become connected with everything. However, the actual 
connections established and how they evolve need to be empirically demonstrated and 
they are therefore unpredictable. The reason for this structural openness is that the 
constituent elements of a remix and the character of the new piece are undetermined. 
In other words, the new piece is not just the aggregation of individual parts; rather it 
emerges through the specific characteristics of its components.
In montage theory this feature has not least been established by the film experiments 
of Lev Kuleshov (1899–1970) in the 1920s. The Russian avant-garde at that time was 
not solely interested in formal experiments with the potentialities of the film medium 
but also in search of corresponding artistic forms of expression in parallel with a radical 
reorganization—a novel montage of society.
Current remix practices, in contrast, are less politically motivated but rather corre -
spond—in many cases probably unknowingly—with theoretical positions of a newly 
emerging anti-essentialism, represented for example by De Landa’s “Assemblage Theory” 
and Latour’s “Actor-Network-Theory.”
In particular Latour’s quest for a flat ontology is deducible from the trivial fact that all 
things are objects. By using the example of a command-and-control war room14—the 
place where the commander sits—Latour’s principle of irreduction becomes plausible 
insofar as the commander’s strategic view is an illusion because it is constructed for her 
by various mediators (data analysts, information designers, as well as nonhumans such 
as the maps, computers, charts, and graphs). Despite their far-reaching impact and the 
mass of data compiled to give them a strategic view, the generals are part of the system 
and thus are unable to control it like any other being. This is a state of randomness and 
heterogeneity suggesting that nothing is reducible to anything else. As soon as you 
engage with a system, likewise, the representations become part of the system. Hence 
the map that attempts to represent the territory makes the difference.
De Landa distinguishes between “interiority” and “exteriority” in conceptualizing the 
components of a thing. Assemblage Theory presupposes that relations among the parts 
are contingent, and they can be extracted from one whole and inserted into another. As 
De Landa states:
These relations imply, first of all, that a component part of an assemblage may 
be detached from it and plugged into a different assemblage in which its interac -
tions are different. In other words, the exteriority of relations implies a certain 
autonomy for the terms they relate.15
Another key aspect in De Landa’s theory is the equal importance of “micro” and “macro,” 
inferring that social reality is “multiscaled,” with assemblages existing at every level. 
With that said, synthesis is privileged over the fragment, provided that its components 
are in a permanent flux. As for cultural production, this would translate into equations 
such as synthesis = montage and fragment = remix. In montage techniques the compos -
ing elements always remain identifiable and recognizable, such as film cuts, whereas 
remix pursues granularity and heterogeneity of diverse elements that can be randomly 
recombined and recontextualized.
60
S. SONVILLA-WEISSThe Birth of the Prosumer in Social Media
Cultural production in highly specialized modernity was a domain of experts who pos -
sessed the essential means of knowledge creation, production, and distribution. Most 
people were consumers whose cultural productive force was restricted to the private. 
This caused a natural division between the professional and the widespread amateur 
culture, along with its accompanying technological, economic, and juridical implica -
tions. The montage of early modernism began to confound these cultural norms yet 
without seriously shaking the societal order as a whole.
Only the mass distribution of networked computers advanced a paradigmatic shift in 
society. The newly introduced networked practices of distribution and productions, aka 
remix, suddenly opened up an unknown territory, which was for a long time governed 
by technological, economic, and juridical restrictions.
In the pursuit of the apparatus, from Freud’s “prosthesis god” to McLuhan’s “extension 
of men” to Mann’s wearable computers, single user interaction has shifted into multiple 
user interaction on various platforms with either time-based (e.g., video sharing),  
image-based (e.g., photo sharing), text-based (e.g., blogs and wikis) or audio-based (e.g., 
podcasts) media. The driving force behind this global move towards self-expression, 
authenticity, and community building is rooted equally in human nature’s inherent nar -
cissism and the basic desire to belong to a specific group. Both extremes—idiosyncratic 
exposure and social networking— are phenomena that do not constitute media culture 
per se, but rather belong to a newly observed phenomenon in current Web 2.0 
developments.
A new species, the social networker, has come into being. He/she is a multitasking 
information producer and manager, a multimedia artist and a homepage designer, an 
actor and a director of self-made videos, an editor and an author of his/her blog, a mod -
erator and an administrator of a forum, to name only a few of the most prevalent char -
acteristics. Social networkers select and publish their own information and put it straight 
from other networkers’ flows directly into their own communities.
The traditional definition of the “user” thus loses its hitherto determinative character 
of information consumption and application usage. In this way, content that is created 
in one place can be dynamically posted and/or updated in multiple locations on the 
Web; for example photos can be shared from sites like Flickr to social sites like Facebook 
and MySpace. The interconnectivity of software applications and their users on the 
Web constitute an online literacy with which most teenagers and prosumers are familiar. 
Yet the impact of such a remarkable media revolution as that of Web 2.0 on individuals 
and society at large can only be fully understood in a media-historical context: under -
standing what and how communication media has transformed within the complex 
interplay of perceived needs, competitive and political pressures, and social and techno -
logical innovations.
Accordingly, two main characteristics drive social media. One dates back to Mark 
Granovetter’s groundbreaking article “The Strength Of The Weak Ties” from 1973. 
Based on a study of job seekers, he discovered that finding a new position does not come 
through the strong ties (friends or relatives), but through the extended network of weak 
ties (in over 80 percent of cases). Similar observations can be made inside “social utility 
tools” (Facebook) that connect people with friends and others who work, study, and live 
around them. This so-called “long tail effect” also has implications for the producers of 
content, especially those whose products could not—for economic reasons—find a place 
61
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALin pre-Internet information distribution channels controlled by book publishers, record 
companies, movie studios, and television networks. (We will come back to these eco -
nomic implications shortly.) From the producers’ standpoint, the long tail has made 
possible a flowering of creativity across all fields of human endeavor. One example of 
this surge can be witnessed on YouTube, where thousands of diverse videos—whose 
content, production value, or lack of popularity make them inappropriate for traditional 
television—are easily accessible to a wide range of viewers. From hair and makeup dem -
onstrations to “fail” videos, a user can watch a video in nearly any niche subject area on 
the video sharing website.
It is exactly this spirit of participation, cooperation and sharing that has fundamen -
tally altered media perception, reception, and production. The shift from implicit (tacit 
knowledge) to explicit forms of knowledge sharing has paved the way for new forms of 
collective intelligence, which one pioneer, George P ór, defined as “the capacity of 
human communities to evolve towards higher order complexity and harmony, through 
such innovation mechanisms as differentiation and integration, competition and 
collaboration.”16
The Rise of the Professional Amateur?
With the advent of mobile technologies, personal and mass communication amalga -
mated into a single medium, blurring the boundaries of the public and private domains. 
For example the “blogosphere” covers a broad range of individual and more publicly 
oriented formats. As a consequence, the hitherto traditional distinction between profes -
sional and amateur culture is no longer relevant.
Further, remix culture has unleashed a vast number of cultural producers, resulting in 
defragmented areas of cultural production. In other words, taking up Shirky’s example17 
of car driving, to which he ascribes patterns similar to the social basis of cultural work: 
a few people do not care about it at all; many drive cars as a daily routine yet more or 
less unaffiliated; others make their living as bus or taxi drivers; some people consider car 
driving a highly charged normative issue (“Free driving for free citizens”); and others 
invest time and money to uplift their social status (veteran car clubs). From occasional 
drivers to F1 racing drivers, in between exists a wide spectrum of car driving in which 
professional drivers represent only a small fraction of all passionate ones and those in 
turn make up only a small subset of actual drivers. Despite the simplicity of learning to 
drive a car for most people, there are certain situations that require specialization and 
professionalization. A similar kind of differentiation can be attributed to the production 
and dissemination of media objects in cultural production. This is not something entirely 
new, since we all actively reproduce culture —if only in the example of coaffecting the 
rise and fall of temporary fashions. The essentially new is that all these different forms 
of cultural production converge in a joint medium, which at least technologically holds 
the potential for a comparable public and civil engagement.
The Internet brought with it hitherto unknown retail distribution mechanisms, which 
became popularized as the long tail by Chris Anderson,18 who refers to Amazon, Apple, 
and Yahoo as examples of businesses applying this niche strategy. Unlike big box stores 
that sell large volumes of popular items with little diversity in stock, these online retail -
ers realize significant profit by selling small volumes of hard-to-find items to customers 
around the world. The total sales of this large number of “nonhit items” is called “the 
62
S. SONVILLA-WEISSlong tail.” Long tail strategies will arguably have long-lasting impact on culture and 
politics.
New technologies, particularly social media, enabled women to participate in the 
Arab Spring as organizers, journalists, and activists. Protesters used Facebook to mobilize 
supporters and organize events, and YouTube videos and Flickr photos gave the rest of 
the world visuals of the events during the uprisings. T witter functioned as a live news -
feed for other domestic and international activists as well as international media organi -
zations. Mobile phones, especially those with cameras and Internet access, served as a 
key tool for cyberactivists. One such prominent representative was Lina Ben Mhenni,19 
a blogger and Nobel Prize nominee, whose reporting from Tunisia’s rural areas helped 
drive the revolution and bring it to international attention.
Quite similar tendencies are observable in other areas. At an increasing rate documen -
taries are made by activists who search for authentic images. This phenomenon is not 
entirely new—due to cost-effectiveness, the 1980s were under the influence of a “cam -
corder revolution.” Even so, the revolution did not spark off due to limited distribution 
channels, and inaccessible supply chains clearly pose an obstacle in postproduction.
Concomitant with the disposability of material produced by others along with the 
resulting remix practices, novel and more complex forms of moviemaking emerged,  
not least because of easily accessible footage material. Steal This Film ,20 a film series 
(2006–08) produced by the League of Noble Peers, is a major account against intellec -
tual property in favor of peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing and was first released via the 
BitTorrent P2P protocol. The first part, made by Swedish activists from The Pirate Bay, 
Piratbyrån —all of them quite influential for the central European Pirate Party move -
ment—mostly includes interviews about the illegal confiscation of The Pirate Bay’s 
servers by the Swedish police and the political effects of this seizure. This 32-minute film 
attracted attention for its critical analysis of an alleged regulatory capture attempt per -
formed by Hollywood film lobby groups to leverage economic sanctions by the United 
States government on Sweden through the World Trade Organization.
The premise of Steal This Film: Part 2 ,21 which was released at the end of 2007, is that 
file sharing transforms the basic mechanism of how culture and information is distrib -
uted, with consequences as profound as the transformation brought about by the print -
ing press. In an interesting interview taken from a 1972 documentary, Joseph Licklider, 
who was instrumental in funding the early work on the Arpanet, speaks about the need 
to invent a better system of information sharing than print because of the physical limi -
tations of moving around paper. Strikingly, Licklider speaks in this small clip about 
information “sharing,” not distribution or the like.
Another documentary on the same subject, Good Copy, Bad Copy ,22 released by 
Danish filmmakers in 2007, takes a global perspective, introducing two major  
non-Western cultural communities—“tecnobrega” from Brazil and the Nigerian film 
industry. Looking at Brazil and Nigeria, the movie’s core message suggests that whereas 
technological change might still originate from the West, cultural innovation is distrib -
uted much more broadly.
The Pirate’s Dilemma23
In contrast to linearly organized division of labor in traditional cultural industries, 
remix culture emanates from intertwined temporal and organizational areas of produc -
tion, consumption, and distribution. Technically speaking, this is particularly evident 
63
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALin BitTorrent protocols, which inextricably link parallel occurring processes: that of 
downloading (consumption) and uploading (distribution). As a result, the boundaries 
between private usage and public distribution blur and clearly affect the distribution 
infrastructure. Millions of private transactions create—voluntarily or involuntarily—a 
competitive infrastructure, comparable with the professional versions of the same 
vendor.
The emergent file sharing scene at the beginning of the new millennium paved—
more or less successfully—the way for a variety of global brands. Almost synonymously 
with the upcoming file sharing subculture, arose an individual using the pseudonym 
“aXXo”24 (2005–09). He became popular for releasing commercial DVD movies on the 
Internet as free downloads. At that time he was public enemy number one for Hollywood 
executives, and to film fans around the world, he was a modern-day Robin Hood. The 
fragmentary character of remix unveils a striking analogy with BitTorrent’s file sharing 
principles: pieces of the downloading files are collected by seeking out segments of the 
film, album or application from every user’s computer. This “swarming” character makes 
downloading faster, as the more users share a particular file, the quicker the downloads 
will be completed.
Ordinary users may occasionally wonder where all these movies, games, and music 
come from. It turns out that—against general acceptance—the majority of illicit con -
tent available for download is not from consumer-bought entertainment products. On 
the contrary, film industry insiders, DVD factory workers and retail assistants branch off 
the forthcoming releases and pass them on to the scene’s so-called “release groups”25 
which are at the top of the piracy pyramid. These groups are composed of “rippers” 
responsible for loss-free file compression and specialization in a certain medium, film, 
and game genre. Once the copy is released it takes only a few hours to make it available 
for the average BitTorrent user on The Pirate Bay or Mininova.
Even as cyberculture brought with it early adopters and hackers pushing the envelope 
to the utmost extent, sooner or later their work was capitalized upon by commercial 
vendors. Contrarily to the first steps in open source businesses (“Give Away the Razor, 
Sell Razor Blades”26), Matt Mason’s euphemistic appraisal of pirates—“what they are 
actually doing is highlighting a better way for us to do things; they find gaps outside the 
market, and better ways for society to operate”27—quite obviously resembles the deadly 
embrace in the spider web. The same accounts for hackers who work for both sides, 
nourishing the economic spiral by means of fierce competition in the global market, 
something that can be cynically translated into: The only way to fight piracy is to legiti -
mize and legalize new innovations by competing with pirates in the marketplace. As a 
consequence, originally subversive works and ideas are themselves appropriated by cor -
porate business.
However, beyond the gray-zone of file sharing, the means of production and consump -
tion converge in a very visible way in fan culture. Probably the most significant differ -
ence between a fan and consumer is that the identification of the fan with a whole 
cultural universe makes him/her feel a part of it. In his blog entry from 200728 Henry 
Jenkins points out that the industry overlooks the community aspect of users with their 
own traditions of participatory culture. In a similar vein, commercial enterprises con -
sider “content” as something commodifiable and thus isolated from the social relations 
that surround its production and circulation. Fan culture, in contrast, builds on social 
networks of fans who have their own aesthetics, politics, and genre expectations. Jenkins 
continues that the noncommercial nature of fan culture is based on a gift economy, and 
64
S. SONVILLA-WEISSbeing free of commercial constraints, there is leeway to explore themes or experiment 
with structures and styles beyond the “mainstream” versions of these worlds.
Reciprocity
The economic model based on existing copyright regulations relies on intertwined 
control, attribution, and compensation mechanisms that legitimate in great portions 
the model of cultural industries. Yet this assertion is also disputable, insofar as the 
widely ramified forms of cultural economy are by nature more comprehensive than the 
copyright-based industries. One example to back up this argument is the restricted 
claim of copyright holders on copied material for teaching and research purposes. In 
that case the authors are granted fees indirectly by collecting societies. However, it 
should be mentioned that these regulations exert an exceptional regulatory measure 
that does not question copyright per se, but instead deals with it in a more practical 
way.
Under the pressure of current remix practices the knot of complex laws and regula -
tions that emerged from copyright slowly but constantly dissolves. That does not neces -
sarily implicate a decline of existing copyright regulations, but in view of the specific 
needs in the vast arena of cultural production, there is clearly demand for more adapt -
able and differentiated laws. The widely diffused free licensing practices (Creative 
Commons, GPL, etc.) have proliferated individual contributions, but at the same time 
lowered the level of control and perceptibility on individual authorship.
Going back to history, copyright too was a nonissue in the visual arts until recently. 
In 1921, Kurt Schwitters called his own brand of Dada “Merz,” derived from the logo of 
the German “Commerzbank,” which he had used in a collage painting. Artists who 
would do the equivalent today on the Web are at risk of being sued for copyright and 
trademark infringement. It is also true that even the best free software and open content 
license cannot protect you from legal claims of a third party against you. In other words, 
if you create, like Kurt Schwitters, an art movement called Merz based on the 
Commerzbank logo and published your Merz logo with an open content license, 
Commerzbank would still be able to sue you for trademark violation.
One of the advancements of the free software movement was to radically rework the 
very idea of the user. In sharp contrast to the passive consumer attitude in proprietary 
systems, the free software model builds on the idea of a user-as-producer. The user-  
producer is a concept that resonates with the digital experience and the freedom that 
current digital culture allows for ordinary people to become artists and producers. This 
model fundamentally challenges the traditional parameters of copyright law by moving 
away from the concept of “originality” of the work to recognize the value that various 
users contribute through their modifications and adaptions to an existing work. In  
this regard it is worth reconsidering the simplistic binary split of the original and the 
copy as something that does not diminish the value of the original, but instead look at 
copies as additions to the original.
In their manifesto “right2remix”29 the promoters assert that “creative copying  
has become commonplace, the right to remix is a fundamental requirement for freedom 
of expression and free speech.” Consequently, three creative rights are formulated 
(ibid.):
65
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEAL •The right to change works during usage and to publish the results. (Transformative 
usage rights with lump-sum compensation, e.g., background music in mobile phone 
videos.)
 •The right to create and to publish remixes of existing works. (Remix rights with 
lump-sum compensation, e.g., fake trailer for a TV series.)
 •The right to commercialize remixes, in exchange for appropriate compensation. 
(Remix commercialization rights subject to compulsory licensing, e.g., selling music 
mashups on iTunes).
Among the many petitions and proposals to alter EU and national copyright regulations, 
the right2remix initiative seeks to redefine the boundaries of free usage, particularly in 
musical works. Here there is a need for the legalization of samples, which in the case of 
commercial use could be compensated using compulsory licensing models. Moreover, 
the “originality” of a work should be assessed independently from the question of 
whether the inspirational works are still recognizable.
Apart from the creative framework and the rewriting of digital culture via current 
remix practices, concerns raised about fair compensation are by far the most controver -
sial and apparently unresolvable. On a European scale, there has been an ongoing  
discussion about the introduction of a “cultural flat rate”30 (alternative compensating 
system), which is based on a blank media tax or levy for digital copyright holders. As a 
quid pro quo, the circulation of digital copies in file sharing networks for private use 
would then become legal.
One of the major objections against this one-size-fits-all concept is regardless of 
whether you download anything, you have to pay. More importantly, the number of file 
sharing activities will be taken as a basis for payouts and is thus prone to manipulation. 
If you, for example, know that your favorite artist will be paid in proportion to the num -
ber of times a song is downloaded, you will soon realize that you can support the artist 
by repeatedly downloading the same album.
It is often erroneously assumed that file sharing culture has negative impacts on 
artists’ revenues, but, on the contrary, artists are making more, and record companies 
less, money. Studies31 on the music business revealed that during a decade when file 
sharing grew exponentially, revenues increased year by year for the cultural sector as 
a whole and for each individual segment such as film, music, or computer games. 
Consumer behavior shows that music fans spend more money going to live concerts 
and less to buy discs, which leaves more money for the creative people who actually 
make the music.
In conclusion, the coevolving cultural, economic, and technological implications in 
cut-copy-paste culture offer several parallel and reciprocal pathways of cultural and  
economic opportunities—in a process of coevolutionary feedback. Such ventures are 
embedded in community or culture rather than in business values. At the same time 
consumer-generated content has carved out new markets and business opportunities. 
“Web n+1” developments in the broadest sense must be regarded as enabling social 
technologies supporting the growth of consumer cocreation. Similar to the invention of 
printing, we are in another evolutionary step in the growth of knowledge, enabling 
people to cocreate in a “network of networks” which simultaneously holds—following 
the binary logic of digital culture—promises and risks.
66
S. SONVILLA-WEISSNotes
 1 Quote often attributed to Pablo Picasso.
 2 See Jennifer Valcke “Static Films and Moving Pictures: Montage in Avant-Garde Photography and Film,” 
PhD thesis (University of Edinburgh, 2009), 11.
 3 A good example is the 1929 experimental silent documentary film Man with a Movie Camera  by Russian 
director Dziga Vertov.
 4 This famous line is from the sixth canto in Comte de Lautréaumont’s The Song of Maldoror  (1868–69).
 5 Sergei Eisenstein, from the “Cinematographic Principle and the Ideogram” (1929); trans. Jay Leyda, in 
Leyda, ed. Film Form  (New York: Meridian Books, 1957), 37–40.
 6 Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner, Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music  (London: Continuum 
International Publishing Group, 2004), 10–14.
 7 “Origin and Theory of the Tape Cut-Ups” by William S. Burroughs. “Breakthrough” http://activearchives.
org/aaa/media/cache/ubu.artmob.ca/sound/burroughs_william/Break-Through/Burroughs-William-
S_01-K-9.mp3/original.mp3 (accessed October 2013).
 8 D. Holt, Cultural Strategy Using Innovative Ideologies to Build Breakthrough Brands  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010), 252.
 9 http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/detourn.htm (accessed July 2014).
10 P . Burkholder (1994) “The uses of existing music: musical borrowing as a field,” http://www.thefreelibrary.
com/The+uses+of+existing+music%3a+musical+borrowing+as+a+field.-a015109065 (accessed October 
2013).
11 T. S. Eliot ‘Philip Massinger’, in The Sacred Wood  (1921) http://www.bartleby.com/200/sw11.html 
(accessed October 2013).
12 O. B. Arewa, “From J. C. Bach to Hip Hop: Musical Borrowing, Copyright and Cultural Context” ( North 
Carolina Law Review 84, no. 2, 2006), 547–645.
13 G. Cheliotis and J. Yew, “An Analysis of the Social Structure of Remix Culture,” in J. M. Carroll (Ed.), 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communities and Technologies  (New York: ACM, 
2009), 165–174.
14 Bruno Latour, “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern,” 
Critical Inquiry  30 no. 2 (2003): 225–248.
15 Manuel De Landa, A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity  (London: 
Continuum, 2006), 10–11.
16 George P ór, “Collective Intelligence and Collective Leadership: T win Paths to Beyond Chaos,” Sprouts: 
Working Papers on Information Systems  8 no. 2, (University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2008), 7.
17 Clay Shirky, Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations  (New York: Penguin, 
2008), 57.
18 http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html (accessed October 2013).
19 http://www.amazon.com/Tunisian-girl-bloggeuse-révolution-Mhenni/dp/2911939875 (accessed October 
2013).
20 http://www.stealthisfilm.com/Part1/ (accessed October 2013).
21 http://www.stealthisfilm.com/Part2/ (accessed October 2013).
22 http://www.goodcopybadcopy.net/ (accessed October 2013).
23 Cf. Matt Mason’s eponymous book The Pirate’s Dilemma. How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism  
(New York: Free Press, 2009).
24 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AXXo (accessed October 2013).
25 http://filesharefreak.com/2007/11/22/how-to-identify-tags-on-pirated-releases (accessed October 2013).
26 Cf. Eric S. Raymond’s quote in “The Cathedral and the Bazaar,” http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/cathe -
dral-bazaar/magic-cauldron/ar01s09.html#id2762651 (accessed October 2013).
27 http://torrentfreak.com/the-pirates-dilemma-080108/ (accessed October 2013).
28 http://henryjenkins.org/2007/05/transforming_fan_culture_into.html (accessed October 2013).
29 http://right2remix.org (accessed October 2013).
30 See Volker Grassmuck’s “Inside Views: The World Is Going Flat(-Rate),” http://www.ip-watch.
org/2009/05/11/the-world-is-going-flat-rate/ (accessed October 2013).
31 http://torrentfreak.com/artists-make-more-money-in-file-sharing-age-than-before-100914/ (accessed 
October 2013).
67
GOOD ARTISTS COPY; GREAT ARTISTS STEALBibliography
Anderson, Chris. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More . New York: Hyperion, 
2006.
Arewa, O. B. “From J. C. Bach to Hip Hop: Musical Borrowing, Copyright and Cultural Context.” 
North Carolina Law Review 84, no. 2 (2006): 547–645.
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Network: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedoms . New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Bourdieu, Pierre. The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature . Translated by Randal 
Johnson. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1993.
Cheliotis, Giorgos, and Jude Yew. “An Analysis of the Social Structure of Remix Culture.” In John M. 
Carroll (Ed.), Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communities and Technologies , 
165–174. New York: ACM, 2009.
Cox, Christoph, and Daniel Warner. Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music . London: Continuum 
International Publishing Group, 2004.
De Landa, Manuel. A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity . London: 
Continuum, 2006.
Eisenstein, Sergei. “Cinematographic Principle and the Ideogram” (1929). Translated by Jay Leyda, in 
Jay Leyda, ed., Film Form . New York: Meridian Books, 1957.
Holt, D. Cultural Strategy Using Innovative Ideologies to Build Breakthrough Brands . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York 
University Press, 2006.
Latour, Bruno. “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern,” 
Critical Inquiry  30 no. 2 (2003): 225–248.
——. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005.
Mason, Matt. The Pirate’s Dilemma. How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism . New York: Free Press, 
2009.
Navas, Eduardo Remix Theory. The Aesthetics of Sampling . Vienna: Springer, 2012.
Pór, George. “Collective Intelligence and Collective Leadership: T win Paths to Beyond Chaos,” 
Sprouts: Working Papers on Information Systems  8 no. 2, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, 
2008.
Shirky, Clay. Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations . New York: 
Penguin, 2008.
Sonvilla-Weiss, Stefan. Mashup Cultures . Vienna: Springer, 2010.
Valcke, Jennifer. “Static Films and Moving Pictures: Montage in Avant-Garde Photography and Film.” 
PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh, UK, 2009.
Zittrain, Jonathan. The Future of the Internet—And How to Stop It . New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2008.
4
TOWARD A REMIX 
CULTURE
An Existential Perspective
Vito Campanelli
The purpose of this chapter is to frame Vilém Flusser’s utopian reflections in relation to the 
advent of a telematic society in light of a remix culture. In remix culture a work is never 
completed, it functions rather as a relay that is passed to others so that they can contribute 
to the process with the production of new works. This dynamic was already obvious in the 
mid-1980s to Flusser, who argued that in an information society messages are sent to receiv -
ers so that they can synthesize them as new messages. With the aid of Flusser’s work, and 
theories by Lévi-Strauss, Tarde and Le Bon, I will frame remix as a pervasive mass phenom -
enon in which the creation of new information becomes the fundamental criterion for  
distinguishing between the heterogeneous cultural forms labeled as remix.
Toward a Telematic Society
During his career the media philosopher Vilém Flusser analyzed a number of sociocul -
tural dynamics, in particular those arising from the diffusion of the first computers and 
their subsequent role in the progression toward a “telematic society” (according to 
Flusser, this would be the first society that methodically seeks to increase the sum of 
available information). Some of his reasoning concerning this new form of sociality 
seemed to be beyond the horizon of possibility during the times in which they were 
formulated (mid-1980s to early 1990s). Indeed, he anticipated some constitutive aspects 
of contemporary culture, whose main compositional paradigm appeared to be remix. An 
in-depth exploration of the distinctive features of a remix culture will be discussed in 
later sections of this text; at this point it should be clarified that the use of the term 
“remix” refers to an irreversible process of hybridization of sources, materials, subjectivi -
ties, and media ongoing in contemporary society. Focusing on its significant cultural 
impact we can consider the remix as Manovich defined it, as a metaphor for the general -
ized amalgamation and digitalization of culture.1 Manovich argues that today many cul -
tural and lifestyle contexts (music, fashion, design, art, Web applications, user-generated 
media, food, etc.) are governed by remixes, fusions, collages, and mashups. If postmod -
ernism (Jameson)2 was a defining paradigm of the 1980s, “during the 1990s remix has 
69
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREgradually emerged as the dominant aesthetics of the era of globalization,” therefore we 
can call it “the cultural logic of networked global capitalism.”3
A few years before Manovich, Flusser created an interesting parallel between the ways 
in which “nature” (the world) creates new information and the ways humans create new 
information. He first notes that because the information “in the world” seems to arise 
randomly (that is to say beyond any possible intention), the world itself appears as just 
one of very many chance configurations ( möglichen Zufällswurfen ). From this perspective 
even the human brain is no longer generated according to some “creative plan” ( schöp -
ferischen Plan ), but by the chance biological development that itself came into being 
accidentally as the result of chemical processes. Like any information in the world, the 
human brain is bound to decay, in fact it tends toward disgregation and disinformation 
(the second principle of thermodynamics is a constant reference for Flusser).
Flusser argues that the way information decays is as important as its production. He 
contends that information is produced through improbable accidents and decay occurs 
through probable accidents. If this were true it would be incorrect to argue that we 
experience an ex nihilo creation constituted of a linear progression from the void toward 
a predetermined goal (“heat death”). We are not in front of the “universe of linear  
history” but are actually part of a dull game of dice ( sturen Würfspiel ) in which all improb -
able cases must happen, sooner or later, and all dice rolls must lead to a plausible situa -
tion: the dissolution of information.4
According to Flusser, information cannot be produced from nothing; every dialog 
presupposes the existence of some information stored in memory. To put the point 
another way it presupposes an earlier discourse that delivered (transmitted) the stored 
information.5 Flusser established that all the information is synthesized from previous 
information (as we shall see later, this assumption is very important from the perspective 
of the remix); moving from this assumption he states that humans do not create but play 
with prior information, however—unlike nature which plays by sheer chance (without 
method)—their play (following the method of dialog) is acted with the purpose of pro -
ducing information.
Here emerges the first important handhold for supporting the attempt to frame 
Flusserian insights within the perspective of the remix: For the media philosopher, dia -
logs are sort of “guided” ( gelenkte ) games of chance, through which information already 
present in the world is combined (remixed) in all possible ways to construct new infor -
mation.6 However it should be clarified that the concept of “intention” cannot refer to 
“mythical entities” ( Fabelwesen ) as a form of “free spirit” or “eternal soul.” We must 
instead think in the following terms: the so-called “I” is considered as a nexus point in 
a web comprising streams of information in dialog and, at the same time, a warehouse/
storage ( Lager ) for information that has passed through.7
At this nexus point, represented by the “I,” unpredictable and improbable computa -
tions occur, in other words: new information is made. This new information is experi -
enced as intentional (or as freely produced) because each “I” is a unique nexus point 
that, by its position and the information it stores, it is distinguished from all other nexus 
points. Even the telematic society envisioned by Flusser is composed of this unique 
character. Flusser, who anticipated the informational paradigm of the networked soci -
ety,8 suggested that this form of social organization differs from all previous forms because 
it is “the first to recognize the production of information as society’s actual function.”9
Self-conscious of its actual function, it is also a free society, but one whose freedom 
has little to do with the tradition of Judeo-Christian anthropology. Here we face a 
70
V . CAMPANELLIsocialization of freedom, that is to say the disappearance of broadcast centers radiating 
communicative rays out from a center (according to the electric circuitry presiding over 
a society dominated by unidirectional media). The key point here is the emergence of 
senders-receivers10 who, by integrating their decisions in a network with those made by 
other nodes, give rise to comprehensive decisions as a “cosmic superbrain” ( kosmishes 
Ubergehirn ). Therefore, in a telematic society the process of information production 
takes place on a social level, but the single “I,” the single node on the network, main -
tains its singularity. In other words, the socialization of the production of information 
(of decisions and freedom) does not dissolve the “I” but fully realizes it in comparison 
with others, to the extent that “  ‘I’ is the one to whom someone says ‘you’” ( “ich” ist, zu 
dem jemand “du” sagt ). According to Flusser, the telematic society is a real “information 
society” in which human beings experience their freedom by playing methodically (uti -
lizing a knowledge base and strategies for play) with information and, in doing so, they 
give birth to a “rising tide” ( steigernde Flut ) of information capable of opposing entropy.11
Flusser underlines that the production of information is “a game of assembling exist -
ing information” ( ein Zusammensetzspiel mit bereits vorhandenen Informationen ).12 
Moreover, the reasoning Flusser develops regarding the functioning of chamber music 
(Kammermusik ) as a model for the telematic society in general, offers a cue for an inter -
esting analogy with remix practices. He notes that the foundation of this musical prac -
tice is an original score, thus a program, but scores take a back seat during the execution 
as musicians give life to improvisations. These improvisations can be compared to the 
variations  that characterize the creative act of Jamaican DJs, who, as we shall see later, 
are foundational to modern remix culture. According to Flusserian categories chamber 
music is cybernetic, it is in fact “pure play” staged “by and for the players.” Listeners—
Flusser writes—are “superfluous and intrusive” as the method of chamber music is the 
participation ( strategia ) and not the contemplation ( theoria ).
Upon closer investigation, remix culture is also characterized by the prevalence of the 
participatory over the contemplative. Full immersion in remix culture can only be 
achieved through participating in the act of remixing. In chamber music and in remix 
culture each player is both a sender and a receiver of information; in both cases the 
ultimate goal is to synthesize new information.13
Intersubjective Conversations and the Disappearance of all Authorities
Flusser addresses another key issue for a culture dominated by reuse practices—the ques -
tion of authorship. In the universe of technical (and telematic) images it no longer 
makes sense to speak of “author” ( Autor ) and “authority” (Autorität ). Automation of the 
processes of production, reproduction, and distribution make such terms unnecessary. 
The creative modes of production of the past were based—as Flusser notes—on an inner 
dialog ( innerem Dialog ); on the contrary, today most of the information is not produced 
by individuals but by dialogic groups and, moreover, the statute of the work has been 
radically changed by the technical possibilities of infinitely reproducing and editing 
each work. In the telematic society envisioned by Flusser, all information is synthesized 
through intersubjective conversations and its purpose is to be modified by the receivers 
and put back into the flow as new information.
More than anything else, the infinite reproducibility of information undermines the 
Latin myth of the foundation by the “author” (Romulus who founded Rome) and those 
social structures based on the principle of “authority” (linked with an “author”). Flusser 
71
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREfully comprehends what was to become the foundation of remix culture when he argues 
that reproducibility and the automatic distribution of messages lead to the disappearance 
of all authorities. Under the regime of reproducibility “authority” becomes redundant. 
The romantic myth of the author, the idea that there are “originals” produced by “great 
people” as a result of inner dialogs must give away in the face of information that waives 
any claim to originality and realizes the possibility of being automatically everywhere 
and in a constant state of replicability. Hence social structures are created in which the 
idea of the individual founder is renounced in order to create a society open to dialog 
and to its reproducibility (a prelude to “reproducible societies”).14
For Flusser the outer dialogs, potentially open to participation by all, and intersubjec -
tive conversations involving human and artificial memories are far more creative than 
works created by traditional authors. They also generate “creative enthusiasm” ( schöp -
ferische Begeisterung ) and a widespread consensus with respect to the information society. 
We can therefore say—with Flusser—that the telematic society does not abolish the 
concept of “creation” but rather invests it with its real meaning, that of intersubjective 
activity, directed not toward the creation of works, or of “objects,” but toward messages 
that will appear to other human beings as “challenges” ( Herausforderungen ) to generate 
eternally reproducible and infinitely synthesizable new information.15 These last state -
ments ultimately overcome every doubt about the possibility of reading Flusser’s reflec -
tions on the advent of the telematic society from the perspective of remix culture.
Flusser closes his reasoning on contemporary creativity with a confession that he, too, 
found himself carried away with the inebriation  of the game. He expresses the hope that 
others consider his reflections with the same playful spirit, transmitting and modifying 
them in turn.16 Is it possible to imagine a more explicit invitation to remix?
Remix as a Mass Phenomenon
The arguments that Flusser developed about the creativity specific to a utopian telem -
atic society can be connected to the perspective that today we live in a culture of remix . 
He imagined a networked society in which the production of new information can only 
be conceived in a dialogic game with preexisting information stored in memories, antici -
pating the general character of remix as a social practice. This approach is crucial to my 
interpretation of remix, indeed I believe that, rather than facing an artistic (and there -
fore elitist) practice, we are now encountering a pervasive mass phenomenon. Remix is 
a game made possible by new technologies (particularly by the development of postpro -
duction techniques) and by the incredible amount of cultural material that the so-called 
digital revolution has put, literally, in everyone’s hands. It is a game perfectly consonant 
with an era in which “technocodes” based on “technoimages” have replaced the linear 
code (written texts) as the main model of thought. It is a game that favors the surface 
and, taking place only at a surface level, is allergic to depth, such as specificity, truth, 
authenticity, definitivity, and so on.
The act of remixing collocates itself in a gestural continuum  in which in-depth analysis 
and a critique of reassembled cultural objects are not entitled to citizenship. Very often 
we are faced with simple routines in which the materials to be remixed,
are selected solely for their aesthetic surface, as when images are juxtaposed due 
to their complementary chromatic scales, regardless of their symbolic value or 
meaning. Furthermore, machines frequently remix automatically, even if the 
72
V . CAMPANELLIprimary input is sourced from humans, which further undermines the capacity 
for critique.17
If this is true, it would appear misleading to generalize and overestimate the sporadic 
remix episodes that are strongly aware of meanings and values connected to each cultural 
object remixed (remixes made by artists or by other “communication professionals”). 
These lucky episodes coexist next to billions of cultural objects produced through the 
same modalities of creative reuse of existing materials and it is possible to argue that, in 
purely quantitative terms, they represent nothing more than a drop in the ocean of remix.
Analogously, I deem problematic the claim that a remix operates as a transparent 
surface, in which the reassembled materials remain half in sight. To support this inter -
pretation means considering the practice of remix as a reflective exercise or as a reflec -
tion on the elements of the past involved in the practice of the remix and, ultimately, 
denying any discontinuity between the “original” and the “new.”18
On the contrary, to consider the remix as something that can (also) lose track of the 
cultural objects from the past (recontextualized in the present) opens up the possibility of 
interpreting the remix as a revitalization, entering a new vital life inside sources sclerotized 
by the passage of time. In the footsteps of Maffesoli, I prefer to think of the remix as an 
expression of that new form of being-together (that the French sociologist calls “societal”) 
in which modern productivism gives way to a ludic atmosphere. As Abruzzese notes,
the practices of remix  . . . are not only able to act through operations of decon -
struction of the existing and of recombination of the emotional and cognitive 
investment’s “objects” derived from such a deconstruction. But, in their accu -
mulating one on the other, they are also interventions of progressive deletion 
of the normative tracks included in the expressive systems that they incessantly 
remedied. To the point that in some cases the remix is as effective as much it 
erases the historical memory, dispelling, for objective or deliberate ignorance, 
the capital of its traditions and interpretations.19
Framed in this manner, remix is seen as a constitutive element of a new cultural reality 
that disrupts the moral (think of the disruption of copyright) and shared codes and 
promotes the free gushing of a confused flow of emotions-passions-sufferings able to give 
back vital effervescence to cultural heritage.20 In turn, the heritage becomes—thanks to 
its progressive digitalization—an endless catalog from which remixers can draw with 
both hands.21
A Gigantic Playground
Remix involves all domains of human action and not only because the need to reshuffle 
the sources of one’s own culture is common to all human history, but mostly because it 
is an evolutionary duty essential to the progress of the human species. Both biological 
and social evolution takes place by means of minor variations, and then through a  
repetition of patterns—accordingly the evolutionary model is given by repetition-  
innovation. Assuming this perspective, one must conclude that when referring to remix, 
one does not mean that the phenomenon is new: to use fragments of previous works is 
simply what human beings have always done in arts, in sciences, and in all fields of the 
intellect. Therefore, if it is true that the attitude to remix has marked every era, we must 
admit that it is equally true that in recent years we have been witness to phenomena 
that justifies calling contemporary culture a “culture of remix.”
73
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREI would like to highlight two significant phenomena: the far-reaching spread of post -
production tools (available to almost anyone who has at least a computer) that allow for 
sampling and the overlapping of sources at a rate that would be simply unthinkable just 
30 years ago; and the exponential multiplication (through digital media, especially the 
Internet) of sources that one can access at virtually anytime and from anywhere. As 
Flusser writes, in a telematic society all information is at our immediate disposal: “the 
whole universe awaits me at my terminal as a gigantic playground.”22
Although it seems reasonable to argue that human beings have always lived in a 
remix culture, this conviction should not prevent us from delineating the specificity 
of the present era, a specificity that, in my opinion, is produced by the possibility of 
reusing cultural material in a way never experienced before.23 The incredible oppor -
tunities to mix and hybridize the amazing amount of digital data to which one has 
access, simply imposes the act of doing so: “Individuals are forced to think in terms of 
post-production and remix, if they are to be able to face the everyday overload of digi -
tal information” to which their minds and their machinic appendices  are exposed daily. 
“Remix is an ‘evolutionary duty’, arising from every human’s innate need to personally 
transform the materials available to them.” If true, this might explain why “the prac -
tice of remix is more necessary to the contemporary age than ever before.”24 As Flusser 
predicted, the information available to human beings has now reached “astronomical 
dimensions” and is no longer storable by the human mind, hence the need for artificial 
memories.25 The digitalization of culture (the tendency to bring all analogically pro -
duced human culture into the digital domain) is one of the dynamics that has most 
encouraged the emergence of a remix culture, to the extent that it is today possible to 
say that “humans have never had so many materials in their hands ,”26 which is to say: 
so many materials to remix .
Another important assumption is that a characteristic of digital media includes one 
that Lev Manovich defines as modularity : the organization of media objects into distinct 
and separate elements, which can be accessed separately and easily changed and  
combined with other parts in endless combinations.27 Digital technologies also play a 
decisive role, in that they make it possible to work on discontinuous samples (pixels, 
polygons, fonts, etc.) aggregated in modular structures (new media).
Flusser had already realized that organizing media objects into distinct particles would 
have a decisive influence on the contemporary game that recognizes images as surfaces. 
In fact, as sciences dissolve reality  into punctual elements, the purpose of the contempo -
rary gesture of Einbildungskraft  (to compute concepts through a peculiar attitude—not 
to be confused with the traditional concept of imagination) can be nothing other than 
to give the appearance of surface to points (giving an apparent concreteness to punctual 
elements) and thereby to return from the most extreme abstraction (scientific theories) 
to the representable , the conceptualizable , and the manageable . According to Flusser, tech -
nical images express the attempt to grasp, through flat surfaces (such as pictures), punc -
tual elements that are all around us (photons, electrons, informational bits, and so on) 
and to fill in the spaces that open up between them. This gesture can be accomplished 
only thanks to an apparatus that, through its own interface, makes graspable and  
manageable punctual elements otherwise intangible for human hands and fingers.28 In 
conclusion, modern technology on one hand offers a growing number of increasingly 
modular media objects (already very suitable for being remixed); on the other hand, it 
makes selecting, assembling, editing, and publishing elements of the infinite digital data 
flow simpler than ever before and more cost-effective.29 All of these elements together 
74
V . CAMPANELLI(the simplicity of remix operations, the movement toward digital media, and, above all, 
media modularity) prelude, as noted by Manovich, a progressive hybridization of visual 
languages and, therefore, a state of “deep remixability” (or total remixability ), a condition 
in which everything (not just the content of different media but also languages, tech -
niques, metaphors, interfaces, etc.) can be remixed with everything .30
Do It Yourself
Many authors have reconstructed the history of the liberation of users from a (mostly 
modernist) condition of passive consumption of cultural objects.31 Flusser’s model of the 
“discursive society” takes a similar form: Messages are irradiated in a unidirectional way 
from centers/senders. What these types of theories lack is an account of do it yourself 
(DIY) as a mass phenomenon; that is, the masses participate rather than only artists. In 
this sense it is easy to observe that since the 1950s, in response to the progressive mas -
sification, specialization, and automation of the production of goods, as well as to the 
increasing specialization of work duties, the desire to regain possession of a more direct 
relationship with things spreads in all directions. This is a desire that drives Western 
workers to perform a series of activities (usually at home) without the aid of profession -
als, and often without any specialist knowledge.32 Of course, an in-depth historical per -
spective of DIY is beyond the scope of this chapter, though I would like to emphasize 
that no process of gradual erosion of the boundary between producers and consumers has 
been possible without rooting in society (at least in the West) the attitude of creating 
things using available materials (overabundant in an era of opulence) and knowledge 
(easily accessible even before the Internet—consider the popularity of manuals devoted 
to DIY philosophy). A history that discusses only the avant-garde (or anti-avant-garde) 
practices of Do It Yourself seems profoundly one-sided as an individual who keeps on 
walking with only one leg.33 To summarize, without diminishing the decisive contribu -
tion of the practices introduced by the avant-garde and counter-avant-garde, it is essen -
tial to remember the importance of phenomena that involved Western society in a 
much more comprehensive way.
The potential for a more widespread DIY culture—including home repair,  
model-, and prototype-making and many of the heterogeneous activities connected to 
“hobbies”—has been noted by some philosophers and has become a privileged field of 
investigation in cultural studies. Beyond this specific research field, it is useful to remem -
ber the concept of bricoleur  (which denotes a way of thinking and working halfway 
between the concrete and the abstract) at the heart of the reflections of Lévi-Strauss. 
Although the French anthropologist identified this attitude in non-Western societies,34 
his reflections can be seen to refer to amateurs in general. Framed in this way, they are 
precious precisely because they mark the distance between the specialized practices of 
the engineer (a metaphor of the industrial universe) and the way of thinking and work -
ing of the bricoleur . In Lévi-Strauss’s interpretation, the bricoleur is someone who works 
with their hands, someone who uses different tools than those used by professionals. 
Thus the bricoleur behaves primarily as a collector: before any action he/she will browse 
his/her tools imagining possible uses (the bricoleur “interrogates all the heterogeneous 
objects of which his treasury is composed to discover what each of them could sig -
nify”).35 However, the most characteristic here is the addressing of the existent leftovers 
of human works, in other words, reorganization of the existing is prevalent in respect  to 
creating from nothing.
75
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREThe bricolage  of the present era uses leftovers of the “  ‘already seen’, that which are 
openly transmitted and displayed in the media universe.”36 They are then reused, reas -
sembled, and put back into circulation as messages (signs) and, in doing so, determining 
new uses and trajectories, and possibly altering meaning. But—this is the aspect that I 
want to emphasize most—the act of the bricoleur is functional to a system, such as the 
present one, in which social rooting presupposes the repetition of signs. The contempo -
rary bricoleur (the remixer) is part of the flow  and thus promotes its unstoppable 
flowing .
As mentioned before, the automation of production, as a consequence of the techno -
logical innovations of the second half of the twentieth century, ignited in Western 
workers the desire to regain a more direct relationship with things. This dynamic can be 
compared to that which nowadays propels the inhabitants of a hyperglobalized world to 
react to information overload—what Flusser describes as the “flood of (technical) 
images.” Even netizens desire a more direct relationship with things , but things have lost 
their materiality and today appear mainly as information flow.37 On a closer look, the 
practice of remix is precisely an answer to this need: remixing a media object (be it 
content, a medium , a language or a thought pattern) means appropriating it, offering a 
personal version of images, sounds, and whatever else pushes contemporary individuals/
remixers to desire (or to the illusion of desiring). In other words, remixing takes the 
value of making one’s own the object of desire (despite the ephemeral transience that this 
gesture assumes in the frame of contemporaneity).
It would appear that the only way to enjoy the infinite flow of information that passes 
through us at every moment is now a process of selection, editing, and promoting the 
flow in new contexts or personalized forms. Besides being an evolutionary duty, remix 
therefore assumes an important specific weight even on an existential plane: in fact, the 
feeling of appropriating elements of the flow comforts the contemporary individual offer -
ing, on the one hand, the opportunity to assert his/her social consistency through the 
dialog with others (the Self that finds him/herself entering a remixing relationship with 
the Other), on the other, the inebriation  of having one’s own purpose (though it is quite 
obviously an illusion) to set against the machines’ will to program humans to incessantly 
feed on the flow.
In terms of Flusserian media philosophy purpose  is a typical conditioning of historical 
thinking, a kind of ballast that forces the questioning of everything and always prompts 
a search for underlying reasons. Precisely for this reason, rather than purpose , it is prefer -
able to speak of an engagement  against nature and above all against the inevitable natural 
decay of information. From this standpoint, the production of new information can be 
interpreted as an engagement against being forgotten; in fact it is well known that all 
artificial storage media are subjected to the second law of thermodynamics and, sooner 
or later, they will decay along with the information stored in them. Electromagnetic 
information instead, as “pure” information (information that does not require a material 
medium ), may, according to Flusser, allow human beings to escape “the curse of being 
forgotten.”38 With respect to memories, which escape the laws of nature, forgetting 
becomes an “information strategy” no less important and necessary than learning (that 
is to say acquiring information).
For Flusser redundant information should be deleted as the informative material 
should be stored, for this purpose we must learn to differentiate them. One of the main 
tasks of a telematic society is thus to acquire, through dialog, competency in differentia -
tion (telematics is considered by Flusser a genuine school for freedom: “ Telematik als 
76
V . CAMPANELLISchule der Freiheit ”).39 In the light of these considerations it is possible to rephrase the 
distinction (absolutely central to Flusser) between the “natural” and the “cultural/
human” production of information in the following terms: Natural production is uncer -
tain, it is a “blind play of chance,” it decays over time. Cultural/human production is 
strategic, it is an intentional game set in the opposite direction of the inevitable decay. 
The intentional aspect of the strategic–dialogic game with “pure” information allows a 
new way of approaching the question of freedom, which in Flusser’s construction 
becomes “what fights against death” (against being forgotten). Seen from this point of 
view, only those who are competent at differentiating between redundant information 
and informative information are free. To use the words of Flusser, freedom is the “human 
engagement in producing information against entropy, decay, death.”40
Imitation and the Social: The Foundations of Remix Culture
At this point, to fully understand the true importance of remix culture, it is essential to 
focus on some ideas that emerged at the end of the nineteenth century when the prin -
ciple of imitation of an original model was defined in different fields and was considered 
the common matrix of cultural and social growth. Among the most interesting positions 
is one created by Gabriel de Tarde, who, in Les lois de l’imitation  (1890)41 describes the 
mechanism of “selective imitation.” Tarde identifies two presuppositions: the role of 
imitation for social life is analogous to the role of heredity in biological life; and every 
social repetition comes from an innovation. Every human invention (which inaugurates 
a new kind of imitation) engenders a new series, so that the invention of gunpowder is 
to social science what the blooming of a new plant species is to biology, or the birth of 
new matter to chemistry: these “repetitions are also multiplications or self-spreading 
contagions.”42
The conception of society proposed by Tarde is based on the rejection of utilitarian -
ism: Sociality does not depend on economic (as in the interdependence of needs, mutual 
assistance, provision of services, and so on) or normative (like the rights established by 
law, customs, and conventions) relationships, but rather from an imitative relationship. 
Since society is imitation, and imitation is essentially a phenomenon of contagion of 
“belief” and “desire,”43 these “beliefs” and “desires” give shape to society. In fact the 
stability of social institutions is connected to the unanimous beliefs that they embody, 
while the revolutionary impetus of the desire constitutes the engine of progress.44
Gustav Le Bon, in the footsteps of Tarde, also assigns a pivotal role to contagion in 
the formation and entrenchment of opinions and beliefs: In addition to determining the 
intellectual orientation the contagion would also enable the individual to disappear 
inside the crowd (collective souls whose main feature is the near absolute psychic soli -
darity of the constituents’ minds).45 A single passage is sufficient to clarify his viewpoint: 
“Ideas, sentiments, emotions and beliefs possess in crowds a contagious power as intense 
as that of microbes.”46 The same imitation, which Le Bon also considers decisive in 
determining the social dynamics of crowds, “is in reality a mere effect of contagion.”47 
A proof of Le Bon’s statement is the fact that in most cases, imitation is unconscious.48 
As Le Bon describes, a “special atmosphere” for contagion is created, “a general manner 
of thinking”49 and opinions and beliefs are propagated “by contagion, but never by 
reasoning.”50
Getting back to Tarde, one of the peculiarities of his thought is that imitation and 
innovation are not presented as logical opposites: the imitative waves follow one another 
77
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREand overlap themselves, crossing each other and outlining a new model to be imitated. 
He argues that in order for the novelty introduced by innovation to settle, it must be 
transmitted through imitation. For Tarde, therefore, imitation is the conditio sine qua 
non of progress, to the point that the initial spark, the original act of imagination of an 
anthropoid had, as an effect, not only the acts of imitation which have issued directly 
from it, but also all the acts of imagination that it suggested and which in turn have 
suggested new ones, and so on indefinitely.51 This suggests that only the innovations that 
are imitated assume social relevance.
In this regard, French sociologist and philosopher Bruno Karsenti has given rise to an 
interesting reinterpretation of the historical opposition between Tarde and Durkheim52 
and writes that:
considered in the abstract, an imitation is no more than a repetition, an infinite 
reproduction of the same. Considered in concrete terms, however, imitation 
becomes pluralized. Multiple flows emerge, within variable relations of compo -
sition or substitution. In this context, repetition becomes variation.
Furthermore: “against a background of repetition, differentiation not only can, but 
indeed must necessarily take place.”53
Tarde’s dynamic characterizes a remix culture. This is already evident in the practice 
of those Jamaican DJs and producers who, at the end of the 1960s, gave birth to the first 
modern remix culture by creating new or altered versions (revisions) of already existent 
songs.54 In Jamaican dub the repetition is never a return to the identical, and, as Tarde 
stated, repetitions lead to changes. This aspect becomes even more manifest in digital 
networks, where in order for remix innovation to take root in the networked society it 
needs to be subsumed into a flow of continuous repetition.55 Paraphrasing Tarde, who 
has stated that an idea spreads thanks to the rooting of the languages of communication 
into conversation56—we can suggest that remixes become popular through their rooted -
ness within the aesthetics of repetition. The repetition is the “living environment” in 
which forms and styles of remix culture are born and spread, and it is almost superfluous 
to mention that contemporary communication, especially the Internet and more specifi -
cally social media, represent the ideal breeding ground for the diffusion of ideas, beliefs 
and trends (memes) which, as with viruses ( virus ideas), propagate through the network 
by infecting the minds of those who come in contact with them.57
If these assumptions are true, it can be argued that in the contemporary world  
innovation is possible only within the framework of a practice of remix, in other words, 
inasmuch as every construction takes the form of reusing and building upon existing 
materials, it can be deduced that nothing is created out of nothing. Remix culture can 
therefore be seen as the final destination of that process of disintegration of the modern -
ist myth of originality which, under a series of concentric forces (economic, social, 
cultural, and technological ones), finds its fulfillment with the global expansion of digi -
tal media. If in the artistic avant-gardes of the twentieth century there was still a funda -
mental ambiguity, concerning the cultivation of the romantic myth of originality (even 
if their practice contradicted what they professed at a programmatic level), it is in con -
temporary art that the concept of originality falls into deep crisis and the place of the 
artwork is ultimately taken over by practices like pastiche, collage, cut-up, quotation, 
appropriation, and all the grammar of gestures that characterize postmodern art.58 
Nevertheless the system of contemporary art, in its various components (artists, 
78
V . CAMPANELLIcurators, gallery owners, collectors, museums, etc.), is stuck in a paradoxical defense of 
“originality” (understood as the possibility of attributing the authorship of a work to the 
solitary genius of an alleged artist). It is therefore only in the remix culture that the 
originality, in its literal sense of something that exists from the beginning or something that 
is not copied or imitated, finally dies.59 To use the words of Flusser, the myth of the 
author succumbs when facing information that, relinquishing any claim to originality, 
opens the possibility of being automatically anywhere, in a state of constant 
replicability.60
Discursive and Dialogic Remixes
Bringing the discourse back to the general Flusserian categories may be useful for 
distinguishing between two types of activities which may be, in a very broad sense, 
labeled as remix: the simple copy of a media object (for example sharing on one’s own 
website a picture published in a different context) and the hybridization of two or 
more sources (for example modifying videos with other media objects, such as back -
ground music). First of all, it must be said that there are doubts about the possibility 
of considering sampling or the simple copy/paste a real remix—it is in fact often a mere 
duplication or displacement of unedited information (except for the different contexts 
in which they are published). Eduardo Navas claims that such cases cannot be con -
sidered remixes, even if they are still important because they demonstrate how the key 
principles of the logic of remix (in particular sampling) are extended to all media61 
and more generally to contemporary culture as a whole. Aware of this misuse  I choose 
to continue to define “remix” as the simple copies of preexisting cultural objects even 
if my choice is instrumental: Indeed my aim is to demonstrate that these activities, 
while confirming the initial premise that is the transformation of remix in the com -
positional paradigm of contemporaneity (one thinks in terms of remix even when not 
producing real remixes but simple copies), are functional to the diffusion and circula -
tion of information but do not add anything to the cultural fragments transmitted. I 
therefore propose to call them discursive remixes as discourse is the most typical system 
of information transmission in a society dominated by “unidirectional media.” Clearly, 
the architecture described by Flusser is not reflected in the reality structured by end -
less copy and paste operations: in these cases there are no rays (media channels) that 
radiate outward from the center (the sender) to reach individual receivers, neverthe -
less it is possible to maintain the metaphor of the ray as long as one imagines these 
channels of communication as consisting of a large number of points, or better, from 
all the nodes (of a network) which retransmit and copy and paste  the same information. 
As with broadcast media there is no dialog with the source that issued the original 
message, sampling is in fact an amplification of the reach of the original message and, 
at most, a likely (but not obvious) adherence to its content. The situation is however 
quite different because rays are not mono-directional but technically reversible. The 
lack of dialog between the original sender and those who copy and retransmit the 
message is therefore not to be attributed to the technique but to a lack of willingness 
to communicate or to the prevailing of a new form of dialog—that certainly would not 
be appreciated by Flusser—in which the dialogic exchange is nothing more than a copy 
to which, in abstract terms and with a huge dose of optimism, one could assign the 
value of an implicit adherence to the system of values, beliefs, and desires at the base 
of the copied message.
79
TOWARD A REMIX CULTUREOne element that I wish to emphasize is that we must recognize the full citizenship 
rights of discursive remixes  within remix culture. In fact, if it is true that innovation 
comes from repetition (Tarde) it is just in these infinite chains of copy and paste that 
small differences emerge from the copied model as well as the ability to create new 
information and escape the natural tendency to entropy.
Of course, in addition to discursive remixes there are dialogical remixes— those in which 
the game with information (which we have seen to be the cornerstone of both a remix 
culture and the utopian telematic society envisioned by Flusser) is fully realized. The dia-
logical remixes are in fact addressed at what Flusser calls “creative receivers”: they process 
them (remix them) giving rise to new information. Here new information is not intended 
to be “concluded, complete, perfect” but to enrich the information already existing in the 
world so that others can creatively continue the game.62 Assuming this perspective, it fol -
lows that the remixer/creative receiver is not committed to producing something (a work, 
even if open in the manner of Eco), but to the (creative) process itself.
Dialogical remixes , corresponding to the informative images of Flusser and to the innova -
tions of Tarde, while not escaping the fate of discursive remixes (to constantly feed the flow 
of information required by machines), are the only way to avoid succumbing in the rela -
tionship with apparatuses. In order not to be programmed by the apparatuses it is necessary 
to devote oneself to their reconfiguration and programming, in other words it is necessary 
to say: “I want to have my program so that I won’t be subject to anyone else’s.”63
In a society dominated by unidirectional media , senders possess the programs, and we are 
possessed by them; hence the need to dispossess and to socialize programs. In a fully real -
ized society of information , that is to say a society in which centralized senders were over -
come, it would no longer make sense to speak of dispossession; one should rather think in 
terms of dialogical programming and therefore more than using “one’s own program” it 
would be appropriate to use the formula “programs of others.” In a telematic society , as 
Flusser points out, there is no longer the need to possess one’s own program to reduce the 
fear of succumbing to someone else’s program. What is really fundamental is having the 
“programs of others” in order to edit, remix, and share, in turn, with others.64
Notes
 1 Vito Campanelli, Web Aesthetics: How Digital Media Affect Culture and Society  (Rotterdam: NAi 
Publishers, 2010), 190.
 2 Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 1991).
 3 Lev Manovich, Software Takes Command  (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 267.
 4 Vilém Flusser, Ins Universum der technischen Bilder  (Gottingen: European Photography, 1985), trans. Into 
the Universe of Technical Images  (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 87–90.
 5 Vilém Flusser, “Photo Production” (1984), unpublished typescript from a lecture delivered at Ecole 
Nationale de la Photographie , Arles (France), February 23, 1984. It is available in the Flusser Archive , 
Berlin.
 6 Flusser, Into the Universe , 90.
 7 It is important to underline that Flusser goes beyond the traditional opposition between Darwin and 
Lamarck, indeed he applies his reasoning to acquired (Lamarck) as well to inherited information 
(Darwin).
 8 Manuel Castells, The Rise of the Network Society  (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1996).
 9 Flusser, Into the Universe , 92.
10 This interpretation of Flusser is partly consistent with the concepts of “demassification” and “prosumer” 
proposed by Toffler, see Alvin Toffler, The Third Wave  (New York: Bantam Books, 1981).
11 Flusser, Into the Universe , 91–94.
80
V . CAMPANELLI12 Ibid., 95.
13 Ibid., 162–163.
14 Ibid., 95–99.
15 Ibid., 99–103.
16 Ibid., 104.
17 Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , 198.
18 For the concept of “reflexive remix,” see Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  
(Vienna: Springer, 2012). See also Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture,” in 
Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss (Vienna: Springer, 2010).
19 Alberto Abruzzese, introduction to Remix It Yourself  by Vito Campanelli, xi. Unless otherwise noted, all 
translations are by the author.
20 Michel Maffesoli, Le temps des tribus. Le déclin de l’individualisme dans les sociétés postmodernes  (Paris: La 
Table Ronde, 1998), trans. The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in Mass Society  (London: 
Sage, 1996).
21 Vito Campanelli, Remix It Yourself. Analisi socio-estetica delle forme comunicative del Web  (Bologna: CLUEB, 
2011), 11.
22 Flusser, Into the Universe , 126.
23 Campanelli, Remix , 15.
24 Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , 194.
25 Flusser, Into the Universe , 99.
26 Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , 194, original emphasis.
27 Manovich, Software Takes Command . On the concept of “modularity,” see also Manovich, The Language 
of New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001).
28 Flusser, Into the Universe , 15–23.
29 Campanelli, Remix , 18.
30 Manovich, Software Takes Command , 267–277.
31 Toffler (1981), Lévy (1994), Castells (1996), Bruns (2006), Deuze (2006), Jenkins (2002 and 2006), 
Lessig (2008), Shirky (2008), Sch äfer (2011), just to quote a few authors.
32 Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , 203.
33 Ibid., 204.
34 Lévi-Strauss relates bricolage to the mythical thinking: it is in fact the method by which primitives organ -
ized their myths, their worldview, their language, their society and—ultimately—their thinking and its 
rules. Claude Lévi-Strauss, La pensée sauvage  (Paris: Plon, 1962), trans. The Savage Mind: The Nature of 
Human Society Series  (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1966).
35 Ibid., 7–18.
36 Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , 205.
37 According to Flusser, science and technology, “these triumphs of Western civilization” have “eroded the 
objective world around us into nothingness”: “reality” is disintegrated in dimensionless points (quanta) 
or—as Flusser puts it—“everything is a swarm of points” (Flusser, Into the Universe , 38). “What remains 
are particles without dimension that can be neither grasped nor represented nor understood. They are 
inaccessible to hands, eyes, or fingers.” But they can be calculated and computed by means of computers 
(Ibid., 10).
38 Ibid., 108.
39 Ibid., 112.
40 Ibid., 105–114.
41 Gabriel de Tarde, Le lois de l’imitation  (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1890), trans. The Laws of Imitation (New York: 
Henry Holt, 1903).
42 Ibid., 17.
43 These two fundamental poles of Tardian sociology are not referable to feelings (to pure affective states), 
they are rather mental powers, psychic powers that take a decisive social value by virtue of their measur -
ability, by an identity that endures unchanged while transferring from one individual to another, by the 
ease with which they are communicated and by their strong contagiousness.
44 Gabriel de Tarde, “Qu’est-ce qu’une société?” Revue Philosophique , XVIII (1884), 489–510.
45 Gustav Le Bon, Psychologie des foules  (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1895), trans. The Crowd: A Study of the Popular 
Mind  (New York: Digireads.com, 2008).
46 Ibid., 60.
47 Ibid.
48 Ibid., 66.
81
TOWARD A REMIX CULTURE49 Gustav Le Bon, Les lois psychologiques de l’évolution des peoples  (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1895), trans. The 
Psychology of Peoples  (New York: Macmillan, 1899) 174.
50 Le Bon, The Crowd , 61.
51 Tarde, The Laws of Imitation , 43.
52 About the opposition between Tarde and Durkheim see Mike Gane, On Durkheim’s Rules of Sociological 
Method  (New York: Routledge, 2011), 52–56.
53 Bruno Karsenti, “Imitation: Returning to the Tarde–Durkheim debate,” in The Social after Gabriel Tarde: 
Debates and Assessments , ed. Matei Candei (New York: Routledge, 2010), 50.
54 The decisive role of the DJ culture in fostering the emergence of a remix culture is emphasized in: 
Campanelli, Web Aesthetics , and Navas, Remix Theory .
55 Campanelli, Remix , 44.
56 Gabriel de Tarde, “L’inter-psychologie,” Bulletin de l’Institut Général Psychologique , 3 (1903), 91–118.
57 Campanelli, Remix , 41.
58 Rosalind E. Krauss, The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths  (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1985).
59 Campanelli, Remix , 45.
60 Flusser, Into the Universe , 95–104.
61 Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups,” 165.
62 Vilém Flusser, Die Revolution der Bilder. Der Flusser-Reader zu Kommunikation, Medien und Design  
(Mannheim: Bollman, 1995), 59–65.
63 Flusser, Into the Universe , 155.
64 Ibid.
Bibliography
Abruzzese, Alberto. Introduction to Remix It Yourself Analisi socio-estetica delle forme comunicative del 
Web by Vito Campanelli. Bologna: CLUEB, 2011.
Bruns, Axel. Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life and Beyond: From Production to Produsage . New York: Peter 
Lang, 2008.
Campanelli, Vito. Remix It Yourself: Analisi socio-estetica delle forme comunicative del Web . Bologna: 
CLUEB, 2011.
——. Web Aesthetics: How Digital Media Affect Culture and Society . Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2010.
Castells, Manuel. The Rise of the Network Society . Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1996.
Deuze, Mark. “Participation, Remediation, Bricolage: Considering Principal Components of a Digital 
Culture.” The Information Society  22, no. 2 (2006): 63–75.
Flusser, Vilém. Into the Universe of Technical Images . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
2011.
——. Die Revolution der Bilder. Der Flusser-Reader zu Kommunikation, Medien und Design . Mannheim: 
Bollman, 1995.
Gane, Mike, On Durkheim’s Rules of Sociological Method . New York: Routledge, 2011.
Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 1991.
Jenkins, Henry. Hop on Pop: The Politics and Pleasures of Popular Culture . Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2002.
——. Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory Culture . New York: New York University Press, 
2006.
Karsenti, Bruno. “Imitation: Returning to the Tarde–Durkheim debate.” In The Social after Gabriel 
Tarde: Debates and Assessments , edited by Matei Candei. New York: Routledge, 2010.
Krauss, Rosalind E. The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1985.
Le Bon, Gustav. The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind . New York, NY: Digireads.com, 2008.
——. The Psychology of Peoples , New York: Macmillan, 1899.
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008.
82
V . CAMPANELLILévi-Strauss, Claude. The Savage Mind , The Nature of Human Society Series. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 1966.
Lévy, Pierre. L’intelligence collective. Pour une anthropologie du cyberspace . Paris: La Découverte , 1994.
Maffesoli, Michel. The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in Mass Society . London: Sage, 
1996.
Manovich, Lev. Software Takes Command . New York: Bloomsbury, 2013.
——. There Is Only Software , 2011. http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/Manovich.there_is_only_
software.pdf (accessed July 10, 2013).
——. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . Vienna: Springer, 2012.
——. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” In Mashup Cultures , edited by Stefan 
Sonvilla-Weiss. Vienna: Springer, 2010.
Schäfer, Mirko Tobias. Bastard Culture! How User Participation Transforms Cultural Production . 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2008.
Shirky, Clay. Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations . New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008.
Tarde, Gabriel de. The Laws of Imitation . New York: Henry Holt, 1903.
——. “ L’inter-psychologie,” Bulletin de l’Institut Général Psychologique . 3 (1903).
——. “ Qu’est-ce qu’une société?” Revue Philosophique . XVIII (1884): 489–510.
Toffler, Alvin. The Third Wave . New York: Bantam Books, 1981.
5
AN ORAL HISTORY OF 
SAMPLING
From Turntables to Mashups
Kembrew McLeod
Artists have traditionally borrowed from each other and have been directly inspired by 
the world that surrounds them. But what happens—ethically, legally, aesthetically—
when digital technologies allow for very literal audio quotes to be inserted into new 
works? Sampling refers to the act of digitally recording pieces of preexisting music and 
placing those bits in a new song. This appropriation practice can be viewed—with some 
obvious differences, of course—as an extension of earlier African American musical 
traditions that valued musical appropriation, such as the blues, jazz, and gospel. Well 
over a decade before the file sharing controversies—beginning with Napster, in 1999—
pushed the topic of copyright to the front pages of newspapers, hip hop artists had 
already raised similar legal and moral questions when they began using the new audio 
technology of digital sampling.1
During the 1970s, hip hop DJs in the South Bronx reimagined the record player or 
turntable as a device that could appropriate and create music—by manipulating vinyl 
records with their hands—rather than simply replaying complete songs. Similarly, hip 
hop artists in the 1980s embraced the newly developing sampling technology as their 
own, finding ways to make new music out of old, rare, or sometimes forgotten, sources. 
As with the sharing of MP3 music files today, many artists and record companies believed 
that the practice of digital sampling was the equivalent of stealing. Others, like Public 
Enemy’s Chuck D, argued that there should be more freedom to recontextualize found 
sounds. However, Chuck D and other similar artists lost this particular argument after 
Gilbert O’Sullivan won the lawsuit he filed against Biz Markie and Warner Brothers 
Records in 1991 (Markie sampled and looped the hook from the hit “Alone Again 
(Naturally)”).2 Subsequently, the music industry began to enforce more vigorously copy -
right law as it related to sampling. The industry developed a cumbersome and expensive 
“sample clearance” system in which all samples, even the shortest and most unrecogniz -
able, had to be approved and paid for. Since this period, the cost of licensing samples 
has continued to increase, as have the costs associated with negotiating those licenses.
This made it legally impossible for certain kinds of music to be distributed—such as 
Public Enemy’s early records—because they contained hundreds of fragments of sound, just 
within one album. Today, it would simply be too expensive to clear copyright licenses for 
albums such as Public Enemy’s It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back —a record 
84
K. MCLEODconsidered so culturally important that The New York Times  included it on its list of the 25 
“most significant albums of the last century”3 and Fear of a Black Planet , which the Library 
of Congress included it in its 2004 National Recording Registry,4 alongside the news 
broadcasts of Edward R. Murrow and the music of John Coltrane. In the interview that 
follows, Harry Allen stated5 one would have to sell a record such as Fear of a Black Planet  
for $159 per CD to pay for all the licenses, as opposed to a time before 1991 when not all 
sound fragments needed to be licensed (and the ones that were licensed did not reach 
today’s astronomical prices—sometimes $100,000 for a single sample). Allen may have 
been hyperbolic, but there is more than a grain of truth in what he said. In our book 
Creative License , we (Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola) conducted an economic analy -
sis of Public Enemy’s Fear of a Black Planet  and the Beastie Boys’ Paul’s Boutique , another 
“golden age” album that contains hundreds of samples. We determined that it would no 
longer be viable to release these two albums today.
In the case of the two records we are examining, the artists pay out more than 
they receive. Neither album would be commercially practical to release. Each 
artist, having licensed away more royalties and more publishing than the 
amount that they would receive on each track of the album, would go further 
into debt with every copy sold to the public. The prices for all the samples—
multiple samples on each track—simply exceed the artist’s piece of the record -
ing-revenue pie. Public Enemy would lose an estimated $4.47 per copy sold. 
The Beastie Boys would lose an estimated $7.87 per copy sold. The total amount 
of debt incurred for releasing these albums, according to our estimates, would 
be almost $6.8 million for Public Enemy and would be $19.8 million for the 
Beastie Boys.6
Many artists and critics have argued that this licensing system had a negative impact on 
the creative potential of this newly emerging African American art form before it had 
a chance to flower. They allude to the growth of twentieth century jazz music, which 
would have been similarly stunted if jazz musicians—who regularly “riffed” on others’ 
songs—had been burdened by a similar legal requirement to license and receive permis -
sion from music publishers for the use of every “sampled” sonic fragment.7 The remain -
der of this chapter is a remix of sampled quotes from a series of interviews with musicians 
and producers. The oral history form—which relies on interviewees’ words to drive the 
narrative—lends itself nicely to a history of sampling and remixing. Drawing on the 
knowledge gleaned from over 100 interviews, what follows is the result of hours of crate-
digging through transcripts in order to assemble a narrative about the emergence of 
remix culture and its eventual collision with copyright law.
I have constructed a five-part chronological history (with an introduction and con -
clusion) that allows those who actively participated in the development of sampling to 
tell this story. The first is a prehistory of digital sampling, documenting the ways that 
1970s hip hop DJs developed an approach to music making that continued into the digi -
tal era. The second provides an overview of the impact of digital sampling technologies 
in the 1980s, which contributed directly to what is often referred to as “the golden age 
of sampling,” roughly from 1986 to 1992. The third offers an account of the copyright 
infringement lawsuits that exploded in the wake of that golden age, and the fourth 
explores the ethical—rather than legal—implications of remixing practices. The fifth 
part brings us into the twenty-first century, discussing the mashup phenomenon before 
85
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGconcluding this oral history with some more general observations about sampling from 
artists, lawyers, and record company owners.
Introduction: Appropriation, Technology, and the Law
Chuck D (Public Enemy) :  Sampling is playing with sound, or playing  
sound—like it’s like an instrument, or a game.
DJ Abilities (Eyedea   When I’m sampling, I have all these artists in
and Abilities) :  my band. I’ve got Wes Montgomery. I’ve got 
Art Blakey, he’s my drummer.
Chuck D :  When those old musicians created magical 
moments, you had four or five guys that were 
the best, and they put it down . Sampling allowed 
the best magical moment to be duplicated.
George Clinton  With James Brown, they just sampled “ Yow”  
(Parliament-Funkadelic) :  and all that. That was enough for one sample. 
There was so much personality in the tone, you 
didn’t need to sample much.
Tom Silverman (Tommy Boy  The beautiful thing about sampling was it put
Records CEO) :  tools in the hands of people who didn’t have 
the traditional musical training or skills. I would 
say in the last 20 years the biggest musical con -
tributions have been made by nonmusicians.
Kid 606 (electronic musician) :  Sampling is like Legos. If you give someone a 
bunch of Lego blocks and tell them to put 
something together, then they have something 
to work with—as opposed to saying, “Here’s a 
bunch of plastic, go mold it and then build it.”
Lloyd Dunn (Tape-Beatles) :  The photocopier was one of those challenges 
to authorship—also the phonograph, which 
replaced the traditional artist or musician in 
many ways.
Mark Hosler (Negativland) : I see the computer as the ultimate collage box.
Greg Tate (music journalist) :  A lot of people look at hip hop sampling as 
doing what bebop jazz artists did—taking a 
classic and putting a new melody on top of 
it.
Shoshana Zisk (entertainment   So that’s where people start to wonder, “Why
attorney) :  is sampling considered stealing, and jazz isn’t 
considered stealing?” It’s hard to say, really.
Harry Allen (music journalist) :  I’ve never heard a completely original idea, 
from anyone. Most musicians will say that the 
best musicians copy.
Shock G (Digital Underground) :  How many comedians tell the same joke? 
Nobody says, “Hey that is my knock-knock 
joke, or that is my mama joke.”
86
K. MCLEODChuck D :  [Public Enemy] sampling wasn’t based on thievery. We 
used sampling machines as tools and looking at those tools 
from musician’s point of view. We wanted to blend sound. 
Just as visual artists take yellow and blue and come up 
with green, we wanted to be able to do that with sound.
DJ Vadim (Electronic   Think of sampling as being represented by two different
Musician) :   painters. One guy takes a photocopy of the Mona 
Lisa—that’s P . Diddy, who just samples the choruses of 
songs. The other guy takes the same painting, chops it 
up and it doesn’t even look like the Mona Lisa any -
more. He’s made it into a cow, or a spaceship. That’s 
what sampling can be like.
Harry Allen :  Sampling is like the color red. It’s like saying, “Is the 
color red creative?” Well, it is when you use it creatively . 
It’s not when it’s just sitting there in a paint can.
I: From Turntables To Samplers
Harry Allen :  The first person to perform hip hop publicly in the 
South Bronx, and the person that’s generally given 
credit for being the father or godfather of hip hop cul -
ture, is DJ Kool Herc. And then of course you had 
Grandmaster Flash and Afrika Bambaataa.
Greg Tate :  If you’ve ever had the fortune to see Afrika Bambaataa 
mix—he can move between bits and pieces of records and 
create these incredible medleys in a short period of time
DJ Abilities :  The DJing aspect is so complex, and rhythmically chal -
lenging. To me, the turntable is the last new instrument 
of the twentieth century.
Hank Shocklee  Sampling came out of the DJ culture. You would have  
(Public Enemy) :  a drumbeat, and you would scratch a horn or a guitar riff 
on top of it.
Saul Williams  When you think of the beginning of hip hop, you think  
(Musician and Poet) :  of breakbeats. You had these extended songs with one 
section where there would be a drum breakdown.
Qbert (DJ) :  The break is the part of the song where it’s just the 
drums.
Chuck D :  Favorite breakbeat of mine? You always have to look at 
James Brown’s catalog—to either the “Funky Drummer” 
or the “Cold Sweat” breakbeat.
Hank Shocklee :  “Funky Drummer” by James Brown—my favorite. The 
reason why “Funky Drummer” is so special is because it 
was the first time James Brown stripped down all his 
music and he had just a drum beat.
Clyde Stubblefield  On “Funky Drummer,” I started to play a simple beat  
(James Brown Band) :  and everybody joined in. Next thing I know all the rap 
artists were sampling it!
87
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGGeorge Clinton :  That raw sound appealed to them, the drums and  
guitar—real flat equalization.
Miho Hatori  James Brown’s records sounded so good. The beats have  
(Cibo Matto) : such a fat sound.
Tom Silverman :  In the early days of recorded hip hop, they would just 
use records and drum machines. There wasn’t that 
much more to it than that.
Hank Shocklee :  I think at the time (in the early 1980s) the only thing that 
could capture a sample or a recording was in a keyboard 
called the Synclavier, and that was a $300,000 machine.
Matt Black  Samplers existed back then, but at the time only rich  
(Coldcut) :  musicians could afford them. Once they got cheaper, 
and more people could use them, [this] created an 
explosion of new music and new ways of making music.
Chuck D :  You had a mad dash of creativity, as far as musicianship 
and technological innovation was concerned. Those 
technology companies didn’t necessarily have any kind 
of allegiance to intellectual property owners.
Anthony Berman  The view on the traditional side was that sampling is a  
(entertainment lawyer) :  very lazy way of making music, of songwriting.
Shock G :  As far as sampling is concerned, a lot of musicians and 
artists from the past generation thought that our gen -
eration wasn’t doing enough work.
Bobbito Garcia  If you were sampling Pee Wee Ellis, you know, he was  
(Rock Steady Crew) :  an incredible jazz musician. He was a phenomenal funk 
musician. I mean, this guy played music for 20 to 30 
years, and you’re taking his music. You’re sampling such 
a sophisticated level of musicianship.
Harry Allen :  I think for a lot of people who weren’t used to sampling, 
it was almost rude, actually, to say, “I’m going to take 
this song and sample the drumbeat because I like it.”
Clyde Stubblefield :  I never got a “thanks.” I never got a “Hello, how are you 
doing?” or anything from rap artists. The only one who 
thanked me was Melissa Etheridge.
II: The Golden Age of Sampling (1986–92)
El-P During the golden age, you had these records that were  
(MC and producer) :  these extreme collage records, you know, producers like 
Prince Paul, who helped create the early De La Soul 
records.
De La Soul  We used to sit there with a bunch of records and try to  
(hip hop group) :  find something to go into a song. That process alone, 
that’s what is so great about it, because we didn’t censor 
ourselves.
Harry Allen :   What you are hearing on those records is true experi -
mentation, unrestrained by suits.
88
K. MCLEODMatt Black :  Public Enemy were iconoclastic, definitely. You’d never 
heard collage music like that.
El-P:  One song would have five, six, seven, eight layered sam -
ples from really famous records, but completely reworked 
so that it didn’t sound like the original sources.
Mr. Len (DJ and  You listen to It Takes a Nation of Millions , and you hear  
producer) :  the song “Night of the Living Base Heads,” if you really 
listen to that song, it changes so many times.
George Clinton :  They actually did arrangements. They took small parts 
and had a whole 24-track arrangement that created one 
song.
Prefuse 73  It was just the most powerful onslaught of sound I had  
(electronic musician) :  experienced. And it all was coming from machines. 
When you heard it for the first time back then it’s just 
like, “Whoa.”
Chuck D :  Public Enemy was manipulating noise, as Hank 
Shocklee would say.
Hank Shocklee :  Sampling was a very intricate thing for us. We [the Bomb 
Squad, Public Enemy’s production unit] didn’t just pick 
up a record and sample that record because it was funky. 
It was a collage. We were creating a collage.
Harry Allen :  The Bomb Squad was the association of Chuck D, 
Hank Shocklee, Keith Shocklee, and Eric Sadler.
Hank Shocklee :  My vision of this group was to almost have a production 
assembly line where each person had their own particu -
lar specialty.
Greg Tate :  The synergy between Chuck, Hank Shocklee and 
Eric—that really created the Public Enemy sound, 
because Chuck and Hank hated  professional musicians 
who played “correctly.” You know what I mean? So they 
would come out with the most outrageous ideas.
Hank Shocklee :  I’m coming from a DJ’s perspective. Eric is coming from 
a musician’s perspective. So together, you know, we 
started working out different ideas. When we sampled, 
we’d take a piece from each section of a song. You may 
get one part of the sound is from the intro, another part 
of it is from the drum break down, another part of it is 
from the end, the vamp on the end. So, and all those 
samples are combined to create one sample.
Chuck D :  We would get into a recording session and all four of us 
would just be playing. Hank recorded the session, and 
95 percent was a mess, and 5 percent of the music was 
magical. You would listen to this mess and out of that 
you’d be like, “Whoa, what happened here?” That was 
the closest thing to a jazz band that you could have, just 
jamming. Maybe not a conventional jazz band. Maybe 
someone like Sun Ra [laughs].
89
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGHank Shocklee :  When you’re talking about sampling, and the kind of 
sampling that Public Enemy did, we had to comb 
through thousands of records to come up with maybe 
five good pieces.
Chuck D :  “Fight the Power” has so many different layers of sound. 
You have musical loops going around with vocals, with 
vocal samples. And you got the musical loops compet -
ing with the words, and the loops are going backwards 
and forwards. The song contains a great deal of black 
music history from a 25-year period. You listen to it, 
and it’s like [mock announcer’s voice], “This 25-year 
period black music is brought to you by Public Enemy.” 
From the beginning to the end, it’s filled with musical 
and political history.
Drew Daniel (Matmos) :  What’s exciting about sampling and collage is that it 
makes sound referential—it’s not abstract. Sound con -
tains a specific reference to a specific time and place. 
That’s what’s cool about sampling: that it transports 
the listener, if they’re willing, to move in a pathway 
back to a specific action. It’s like an archive of memo -
ries of real experiences.
Tom Silverman :  There’s all these layers of audio archeology, and you can 
dig down deep enough and find the sampled source.
Miho Hatori :  We’re just buying records, searching, searching, and we 
find a record and it’s like, “There,  that bass line.”  . . . To 
find the right one or two seconds of sound—that’s a lot 
of work.
Bobbito Garcia :  Hip hop has really created a way for artists to take and 
grab different things around them, including music 
from past generations.
Chuck D :  So you had new generations checking out music from 
different areas that were not exposed to the history of 
music, and sampling exposed artists to the new genera -
tions. Then those generations became interested in the 
back catalog of artists like George Clinton.
De La Soul :  For someone like George Clinton’s Parliament-
Funkadelic, you’re growing up to their music, and by 
using this music you make something out of a shared past.
George Clinton :  Funk is the DNA of hip hop. It really helped us a lot 
because people heard it and got to know it and wanted 
to hear the whole version.
III: Digital Sampling and the Law
Siva Vaidhyanathan  In the early 1990s there was a series of lawsuits that  
(media scholar) :  made it very clear the entertainment world was going to 
rein in this practice of unauthorized digital sampling.
90
K. MCLEODShoshana Zisk :  The other person who was being sampled, of course, 
their attorneys got up and said, “Well, hey, where’s my 
piece?” That’s when all the lawsuits started happening.
De La Soul :  It got to the point when a lot of these older musicians, 
their grandchildren were telling them, “Yo, you’re being 
sampled,” so, you know, that’s how they found out.
Mr. Dibbs (DJ):   A Tribe Called Quest’s song, “Bonita Applebaum,” 
someone I know, well, his dad performed the beat they 
sampled. So, when his dad heard that, he’s like, “What 
the fuck is that?”
Greg Tate:   I think that everyone woke up after De La Soul’s record 
came out and Turtles sued them.
De La Soul:   For me I felt like, “Wow, we’re popular; we’re getting 
sued by someone we don’t even know” [laughs].
Tom Silverman:   We would clear samples. The most notable one was 3 
Feet High and Rising , which took forever to clear, and 
that was back when sampling didn’t cost that much.
De La Soul:   The organ and drumbeat was the Turtles’ “You Showed 
Me.” We actually told Tommy Boy records, our record 
company, and they decided not to clear it because it 
was just a skit.
Tom Silverman:   They never told us there was a sample. We can only 
clear what we know. And on 3 Feet High and Rising , 
they told us what the samples were and we cleared 
them.
Shoshana Zisk:   The most famous case was Biz Markie, who sampled 
“Alone Again (Naturally).” The court’s opinion began, 
“Thou shalt not steal” and the judge referred this to the 
LAPD to be criminally prosecuted. After that, every -
one in the industry said, “Okay, we have to change the 
rules here.”
De La Soul:   When it really happened to Biz Markie, [the lawsuits] 
really took off.
Saul Williams:   You’d start missing albums, like, “Shouldn’t Biz  
Markie have an album out by now?” The album comes out 
one year late, and the title is All Samples Cleared  [laughs].
De La Soul:   Things definitely got more complicated. On our fourth 
album we recorded, we sat down at the beginning of the 
album with the record company, Tommy Boy, and they 
went through a list. “Well, George Clinton is in litiga -
tion with Westbound so don’t mess with his stuff right 
now, or George Harrison don’t like rap, don’t mess with 
him.” We actually had a list of people not to touch.
Tom Silverman:   We had great ideas about doing songs that never even 
went to completion because we knew we wouldn’t be 
able to clear the samples.
91
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGDJ Spooky  What happened to Public Enemy in the late 80s and  
(electronic musician):   early 90s is they had to change their composition strat -
egy because of lawsuits.
Don Joyce   There’s a whole industry built up around licensing now, 
(Negativland):   getting clearance rights. Every label has offices that do 
that, and it has become a big income stream.
Anthony Berman:   It certainly created a big jump in the revenue streams 
of copyright holders, and it added another layer of 
bureaucracy to the creative process of making collage-
based music.
Tom Silverman:   It’s a lot of accounting work. You’re having to pay out 
on 60 different people on one album. It’s quite a night -
mare actually.
Shoshana Zisk:   When I was working in copyright at Motown, you’d get 
one song and there’d be 14 people that you had to get 
permission from. And each one of them is like, “I own 
6.2 percent, I own 8.9 percent.” There’s a pie-graph of 
a song and everyone has a slice.
Siva Vaidhyanathan:   Sample clearing quickly evolved to the point that it 
became cheaper to only sample one song per song, for 
economic reasons. That made sample-based music less 
creative.
Chuck D:   That’s when the sound of hip hop music shifted and 
people started to only sample one hook, because it was 
cheaper than paying for 20 or 30 clips in each song—
like how we did it.
De La Soul:   That’s what’s kind of messed up about sampling now. 
When you create a song you hand it to lawyers and the 
costs are just so crazy that you can’t pay that kind of 
money.
Michael Hausman  You can get some pretty outrageous quotes, and that  
(artist manager):   hasn’t helped creativity very much. There has to be 
some kind of reasonable prices.
Harry Allen:   Those records are kind of artifacts of an earlier time, 
records that couldn’t exist today. They’re financially 
and legally untenable and unworkable records. We 
can’t make those records anymore because you’d have 
to sell them for, probably, $159 each just to pay all the 
royalties.
Chuck D:   By 1994, it was impossible to do any type of record we 
did in the late 1980s, because every second of sound 
had been cleared. It kind of curtailed creativity.
Dean Garfield  I find it hard to believe that, even with Public Enemy,  
(Former vice  they couldn’t continue doing what they wanted to do  
president of legal   because if one person doesn’t clear a snippet, they could 
affairs, RIAA):   just use another snippet from someone else who would 
92
K. MCLEODclear it. I think Chuck D may say that today because he 
finds it convenient to say that. But it’s not true.
Chuck D:   At the end of the day, lawyers never lose money; they 
gain from both sides going back and forth.
IV: The Ethics of Sampling
Pete Rock  There’s two sides to everything. Some people like to  
(DJ and producer):  hear their music being sampled, some don’t.
Mr. Len:   It all depends on what side of the fence you’re sitting on. 
Like, if you’re the one infringing someone’s copyright, of 
course, you feel like, “Hey man, this copyright law sucks.”
Michael Hausman:   The context in which music appears is very important 
because in my experience artists are very concerned 
with all aspects of how their art is presented.
Chuck D:   If someone else sampled my work without permission, I 
probably would be mad if my voice was put in a context 
I don’t believe in. If it’s put in, for example, some kind 
of Nazi song, I’d feel offended. Then that’d be a defama -
tion of my character.
De La Soul:   I respect anybody who feels an attachment to a song 
that might be about their mother, and then NWA sam -
ples it and says “bitch” over it. It’s understandable they 
don’t want that.
Michael Hausman:   If the lyrics were sexist, violent, or very profane, they 
might not want to have anything to do with it. The 
artists I work with see their creations as an extension of 
themselves. So I think there is a tremendous desire to 
control this creation because it is you, and you want 
people to get the best of you that you can put out there.
El-P:   I’m empathetic to the other argument, which is that 
you don’t want your music stolen, or taken out of con -
text. I care about my music just as much as anyone else.
Hank Shocklee:   I’ve always been from the school where, you know, from 
if I’m sampling, who am I to attack somebody else from 
sampling from me?
De La Soul :  What happens when we get sampled? Honestly, it’s an 
honor. There’s been some things that I’ve heard that 
were no good, but I know they sampled it out of appre -
ciation for us.
Mr. Lif  I mean if someone uses my voice, I’m not coming after  
(MC and producer) :  you. I remember the days when it was an honor to hear 
someone cut your voice on a chorus. I encourage you to 
use my voice.
George Clinton :  You’re supposed to get paid for it, because it’s your  
personality that’s in the sample.
93
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGPrefuse 73 :  If somebody’s going to take something of mine, some beat 
of mine and use it in some different way, do something 
creative with it, do whatever with it, I’m not going to care.
Shock G :  If it’s just a little piece, a little sound bite here, and a 
sound bite there, use what you like. You like Humpty’s 
voice? Funk with me. Spread it to the world, you know.
Clyde Stubblefield :  Instead of receiving money for sampling, I’d prefer to 
get my name on the record saying, “This is Clyde play -
ing,” to get my name out. Money is not important.
Scanner  Bjork sampled me for a record called Post, which went  
(electronic musician) :  on to sell something like five million copies. She used 
about five seconds of a track of mine, which formed the 
basis of this pop song. I was caught in a boiling pot of 
lawyers battling while I sat behind them thinking, 
“What’s going on?” I didn’t mind it was used for this 
track because I have also used sounds from other places.
Richard McGuire  I’m totally for sampling. I think it’s just like any other  
(Liquid Liquid) :  art form. But I feel both ways about it. There should be 
compensation for the original artist.
De La Soul :  You know, we understand that if you sample someone, 
you should pay for it. If someone wants to get paid for 
it, I understand. They made it.
DJ Vadim :  I refuse to pay for sampling. I mean, I’ve changed the 
music so I wouldn’t have to pay.
Pete Rock :  I’ve never disguised a sample, I never took the chance 
doing that. I play by the rules. If you play by the rules, 
you have to clear the sample—you have to get a license.
Mix Master Mike (DJ) :  I can imagine that a few samples I’ve used I should’ve 
cleared—I am not going to name any particular sam -
ples. But I kind of reinvented them. Smashed them up.
V: Mashups and Digital Culture
Scanner :  The Internet has liberated the world of mashups. So you 
can take a Destiny’s Child track with a Nirvana track and 
actually pitch it so it fits perfectly. And you can take two 
beats that would never ever match and make them match.
Matt Black :  I guess mashups are sampling and mixing for the masses. 
Because when you use material that audiences are familiar 
with, they know that something new is being created. It’s 
spelling it out in BIG CAPITAL LETTERS, basically.
Raquel Cepeda  Record companies often release a cappella tracks to DJs  
(music journalist) :  so that you can play them over more popular instrumen -
tals, you can mix them.
Drew Daniel (Matmos) :  I mean, what’s so great about hip hop and R&B is that 
every single comes with an a cappella on the flipside. 
94
K. MCLEODIt’s like being given some sort of naked photograph of a 
celebrity.
Chuck D :  Technology has leveled the playing field. You put a cap -
pella vocals out there and you become 50:50 partners 
with somebody else who might have come up with an 
incredible piece of work. It is like a universal network 
of studios where technology allows people to have  
studios in bedrooms instead of big expensive studios.
Richard McGuire :  It can just be miraculous how mashups fit together. It just 
knocks me out. Each time you hear new stuff like that it’s 
like, “Oh, it’s so simple, why didn’t I think of that?”
Drew Daniel :  But I think that it can reach a banal “stealth oldies” 
level where it’s just sort of oldies by another means. 
Like, “Oh it’s Wham! and Van Halen!” It’s not actually 
interesting. It’s like, “Wow, you’ve made another jala -
peño mint sandwich and no one wants to eat it.”
Michael Hausman :  I personally like Brian [Danger Mouse], and I like The Grey 
Album , but it brings up a lot of ethical issues and I think 
people have the right to complain about it, you know?
Joanna Demers  The Grey Album  was a sort of mashup that was distrib-  
(Musicologist) :  uted at the end of 2003 by DJ Danger Mouse, who 
mixed the vocals from Jay-Z’s Black Album  with the 
Beatles’ White Album . Soon after it came out, EMI sent 
out all these cease and desist letters to squelch this 
album completely, and this got out on the Internet very 
quickly and galvanized protests in February 2004.
Chuck D :  The Danger Mouse album caused a lot of people to get 
mad at the fact that more people can be producers and 
jump to high heights from low places.
Dean Garfield :  Even though I may enjoy The Grey Album  and may 
groove to it in my own home, the way The Grey Album  
was released is not the way to go about it. The way to 
go about it is to get a license.
Conclusion: The Future of Sampling
Chuck D :  Sampling definitely challenged people’s conceptions of 
what music was.
Mix Master Mike :  It’s an art to us. We want to recreate stuff from the past 
and make it new.
George Clinton :  Just like rock ’n’ roll in the 1950s and 1960s, it reminded 
me of that, when people were saying it wasn’t music.
El-P:  The musical culture of sampling, way that we do 
music—that’s not going to be embraced, it doesn’t fit 
the bottom line.
Mark Hosler :  What we’ve seen in the last few decades, because of 
economic pressure, is more copyright constraints. That, 
95
AN ORAL HISTORY OF SAMPLINGI think ultimately, is really bad for the culture. We’ve 
moved toward total omnipotent ownership of every -
thing, forever. And that’s the death of culture, that’s 
the death of ideas, science, art. It’s very shortsighted.
Drew Daniel :  Another danger inherent in all this is the cop in your 
own head. One of the worst casualties of all this law -
yerly stuff is people not doing things because they are 
afraid maybe someone will sue them in the future.
Lawrence Lessig  Today, to build on something you need the permission  
(Harvard University  of somebody else. And it’s that transformation which  
law professor) : has been radical and recent.
Dean Garfield :  The idea that this will result in less creativity is a farce, 
and it’s an excuse not to use your own creative juices to 
move people. I can suggest an alternative for people 
who feel stifled by the costs of sampling, which is— be 
creative . There’s nothing that compels you to sample 
someone’s work. You can just listen to it and vibe off it 
and create something new.
Tom Silverman :  I would like to see a level playing field where the small -
est guy working in his home studio in the Bronx, or 
anywhere in the world, could come up with something 
without censoring himself because he’s afraid of being 
sued. I think it’s unfair. I think there are a lot of creators 
out there who like to work with building blocks that 
others have created.
Notes
1 Kembrew McLeod,  Freedom of Expression®: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property 
(Minneapolis , MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007), 66.
2 Grand Upright Music Ltd. v. Warner Brothers Records, Inc ., 780 F . Supp. 182 (SDNY 1991).
3 http://www.nytimes.com/2000/01/03/arts/critics-choices-albums-as-mileposts-in-a-musical-century.
html?src=p,&pagewanted=4 (accessed July 29, 2014).
4 http://www.loc.gov/rr/record/nrpb/registry/nrpb-2004reg.html (accessed July 29, 2014).
5 Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola, Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 27.
6 Ibid., 210.
7 Some of the interviews were conducted on camera during the filming of the documentary Copyright 
Criminals: This is a Sampling Sport , produced by Benjamin Franzen and Kembrew McLeod (see bibliogra -
phy). Others were conducted during research for McLeod’s Freedom of Expression ® and McLeod and 
DiCola’s Creative License ; all of the interviews were conducted between 1999 and 2011. The answers, in 
some cases, were edited for clarity.
Bibliography
Franzen, Benjamin and McLeod, Kembrew. Copyright Criminals . PBS, 2011.
Grand Upright Music Ltd. v. Warner Brothers Records, Inc . 780 F . Supp. 182, SDNY, 1991.
McLeod, Kembrew. Freedom of Expression®: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property . 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
McLeod, Kembrew and DiCola, Peter. Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
6
CAN I BORROW YOUR 
PROPER NAME?
Remixing Signatures and the 
Contemporary Author
Cicero Inacio da Silva
Wills:  Are there any nonsigned works, then?
Derrida:  No.1
The Authorship Culture
The concept of authorship is a mark for the potentialities of the remix in digital culture, 
in part due to contemporary discussions surrounding identity. There is a need to answer 
questions posed by authors like Marilyn Randall, who understands the context of author -
ship as an unquestionable element. Randall:
define[s] “authorship,” provisionally and primarily, as the attribution of a par -
ticular set of authorial functions to the agent of the discourse.  . . . Self-
consciousness, here, is the presupposition that the speaking position entails the 
responsibility of assuming the ideas expressed as the writer’s own.2
Following this argument there is a dependence on authority, which is linked to the 
foundation of representation.
The French philosopher Jacques Derrida, on the other hand, pointed out that the 
discourse around the author as a representation attached to a cultural phenomenon lacks 
a deep discussion on the proper name and the signature. Derrida considers the signature 
a very delicate and problematic “cultural artifact,” with which we are not dealing prop -
erly when analyzing the cultural impact in appropriating other people’s works to redefine 
or to create a work of art such as a mashup or music remix, for example. According to 
Derrida,
this is not something one can decide: one doesn’t disseminate or play with one’s 
name. The very structure of the proper name sets this process in motion. That’s 
what the proper name is for. At work, naturally, in the desire—the apparent 
97
CAN I BORROW YOUR PROPER NAME?desire—to lose one’s name by disarticulating it, disseminating it, is the inverse 
movement. By disseminating or losing my own name, I make it more and more 
intrusive; I occupy the whole site, and as a result my name gains more ground. 
The more I lose, the more I gain.3
Derrida’s analysis on the proper name deconstructs an established theory of authorship, 
such as Roland Barthes’s famous statement that “the birth of the reader must be at the 
cost of the death of the Author.”4
The technological potential to manipulate audio permitted artists to use parts of other 
people’s cultural artifacts in their own artwork during the 1970s and 1980s. Taking these 
cultural elements into account, Lev Manovich stated that
Remixing originally had a precise and a narrow meaning that gradually became 
diffused. Although precedents of remixing can be found earlier, it was the intro -
duction of multi-track mixers that made remixing a standard practice. With 
each element of a song—vocals, drums, etc.—available for separate manipula -
tion, it became possible to “re-mix” the song: change the volume of some tracks 
or substitute new tracks for the old ones.5
The first artworks that used the technique of remix were also influenced by the introduc -
tion of computational procedures in music and video production. These works were also 
influenced by a theoretical approach following the “death of the author” while manipu -
lating music and video components.
Authorship Origins
The concept of the author is new and recent. It is a complex and broadly stigmatized 
subject of study with several unfoldings. It has been thought of as a kind of violence 
against the creative act, linked to the romantic ideas of fury, explosion, and passion.6 
The concept of authorship was gradually created from injunctions that were not very 
clear and, in certain moments, it was a victim and a villain in debates related to another 
complex problem of our civilization: property. In several fields linked to culture, eco -
nomics, politics, and sociology, i.e., all forms of human representation, authorship came 
to be operated as an unquestionable tool in the formation of private property. In this 
sense, authorship has been considered a commodity for a long time and the fractures 
caused by this concept in our culture are still being questioned.
Perhaps we can say that authorship is a symptom of our days, but without forgetting that, 
like every symptom, it carries out a possibility of symbolic construction, a possibility of 
representation of what it rejects and a way of thinking of what it retains and displaces. 
The fact is that authorship was turned into a symbol of creation in contemporary cul -
ture. Analyzing how it was affected by the introduction of electronic devices, Richard 
Grusin reminds us that “This elision of the material and cultural basis of electronic writ -
ing seems inconsistent with that aspect of the logic of electronic authorship that fore -
grounds the causal role of technologies.”7 The article “The Death of the Author” by 
Roland Barthes was published for the first time in 1967, in Aspen  magazine, and declared 
directly that the “author” would be dead and would be something doomed to oblivion. 
Barthes addressed the subject from his field, literature, and with sagacity he pointed out 
that in Balzac’s text Sarrasine , the reader was submitted to a privation of voice on the 
98
C. I. DA SIL VApart of the author, and that such privation caused a vertigo within the sphere of recep -
tion, because at a certain moment in Balzac’s romance we can’t be sure who speaks. 
Barthes enunciates that the author, at that moment, was absent and the reader became 
in charge of creating the supplement to the text. “Then, who speaks?” asks Barthes. The 
author? The reader? The written letter? According to Andrew Bennett:
His answer is that we cannot know who speaks. The sentence, he suggests, 
could be spoken by the castrato himself (character of the romance), by Balzac 
the individual, by Balzac as an author “professing literary ideas,” by “universal 
wisdom,” or by an idea of a person proposed by “Romantic Psychology.” We 
cannot know who speaks, Barthes argues, indeed we will never know, because 
writing involves the “destruction of every voice, of every point of origin.”8
Barthes’s text generated countless discussions and there was rarely a consensus on what 
could be considered the “end of the author.” Barthes saw the author as a producer of a 
rigid culture, which believed that there was an origin and, in a certain way, such origin 
guaranteed a series of certainties concerning its own concept. It can be tempting to say 
that Barthes proposed, through a polemic text, to rethink that the author could give up 
the position of “property” and “guarantee” of the text, in order to liberate the reader for 
a demobilized, unaffected reading, if this is possible.
For Barthes, language is treated like a supreme entity, as a founder, as the origin of eve -
rything, even of the author. In condemning what he denominated “origin,” Barthes ends 
up creating something more radical: the language unaffected by subjectivity. The object of 
reading would become an effect of circumstances that would decentralize the movement 
of the interpretation itself. In effect, when Barthes focuses on the drive that would delimit 
the reception as a neutral field, he also points in the direction of the letter as a transparent 
manifestation, like glass, i.e., as an incident, not an object of intentional action.
However, when it comes to remix, the idea of an “original author” can be suspended from 
the representational scene with an abrupt movement, but in fact the implications created by 
this intention are not fully known. This is because authorship created a vision that was 
imposed by the very forms of representation that move around the contemporary conception 
of private property. And if this notion, conception, or ideology finds a particularity in the 
author as subject, it seems obvious that this is not a coincidence when a remix becomes 
popular by using parts of others people creations to produce a “new” interpretation of a cul -
tural artifact. The publication of Barthes’s decree that the author is “dead” was, in a certain 
way, the beginning of a movement to try to destabilize an authority already in question.
The Ends of “the Author”
Martha Woodmansee is concerned about why authorship should be questioned at all. 
Such concern, according to the author, would come from long ago, in fact from the 
eighteenth century, when authors like Wordsworth, for example, would also deal with 
the problem questioning the aspect of power. According to Wordsworth,
if every great Poet  . . . , in the highest exercise of his genius, before he can be 
thoroughly enjoyed, has to call forth and to communicate power that is, 
empower his readers to understand his new work, “this service, in a still greater 
degree, falls upon an original Writer, at his first appearance in the world.”9
99
CAN I BORROW YOUR PROPER NAME?Resuming Barthes’s criticism of the author’s power, the analysis that Woodmansee shows 
us refers exactly to a point that we can consider blind when the criticism of the author 
and authorship is focused on the subject of power, as we will see further with Foucault. 
It is blind because “power,” as we know it, is a reaction to some event, probably created 
by some reason that should occupy more space in the discussions on the end or the 
displacement of the theory of author. Woodmansee locates one of the reasons of author -
ship in the eighteenth century, as something that “establish[es] ownership of the prod -
ucts of their labor so as to justify legal recognition of that ownership in the form of a 
copyright law.”10 Besides being considered only by the traditionally accepted view of the 
merchandise that is sold to sustain trade, authorship would be a reason for introducing 
a control of what is published and a responsibility assumed by an entity or institution.
Around this position, Michel Foucault resumes the idea that the name would be a 
position accepted according to certain cultural specificity, sometimes occupying the 
place of the power to speak on behalf of it, or being a mere result of the inherent action 
of the mark that would establish the supposed condition of the presence of the enuncia -
tor, in accepted ways of discourse.11 In supposing that the subject has been elaborated 
against a totality, in the Freudian perspective—which would be like elaborating a reason 
for the emergence of identity beyond the mere classification of the differences—the 
issue of subjectivity returns to the center of attention, addressing the concept of narcis -
sism. And this is of no interest to Foucault. In a certain way what is demanded by 
Foucauldian thinking is a premise linked to power, without the subject’s social formation 
being linked, once in a while, to subjectivity. One of the problems not only present in 
the Foucauldian theory of power and author-function is also absent in the criticism to 
the capitalist author system. To give up the idea of the “I” is to give up a series of 
ingrained questions on one’s permanence, what is also known as life drive in the Freudian 
theory, in favor of a self-annulment of perpetuation, what Freud described as death drive. 
In a certain way, this self-perpetrated disappearance is unbearable in our society based 
on a fetishist concept of socialization. Foucault calls for the subject’s movement beyond 
its physical configuration, but he is naïve in discarding the basic problem of the idea of 
humankind, even with the declared apology of its end, linked to the narcissism of  
permanence, still so cherished by contemporary society.
I Sign, Therefore I Remix
Opposing most of his contemporaries, the French philosopher Jacques Derrida devel -
oped an analysis that deconstructed Barthes’s and Foucault’s arguments, affirming that 
the signature and the proper name legitimates the cultural artifact at the same time that 
it is constituted within the object itself. It is worth observing that it is the simple act of 
signing that gives the author, whoever he/she is, the possibility of committing with what 
he/she writes and of confirming, in a certain way, what was written. Somehow, the 
author can affirm that what he/she wrote is what he/she said.
Based on the Derridean notion of authorship, we can infer a series of connotations in 
the remixes created by music or visual artists since they use parts of the creation of sev -
eral artists in their own cultural artifacts. The question is whether the artist who signs a 
remix is the creator of the work or just a representation that creatively assembles cultural 
manifestations in a different way. Another point to question is: When our culture 
accepts a remix as a work of art, are we also countersigning this creation? Derrida states 
that
100
C. I. DA SIL VAthe signature is not to be confused either with the name of the author, with the 
patronym of the author, or with the type of work, for it is nothing other than 
the event of the work in itself, inasmuch as it attests in a certain way—here I 
come back to what I was saying about the body of the author—to the fact that 
someone did that, and that’s what it remains.12
At another end of the authorial process, Derrida questions how the fact occurs, or the 
action of the relation between writing and author, since the performative of the signa -
ture is unceasingly external to the text itself, but maintains with it a relation of commit -
ment, being most of the time indispensable for its understanding. What is the influence 
of such relation? In this case, once there is an understanding of the act of authorship in 
a society that will recognize it, we will have the author as a concrete possibility. Then 
the author starts being an effect, even if ephemeral, of such recognition, but
There needs to be a social “community” that says this thing has been done—we 
don’t even know by whom, we don’t know what it means—however, we are 
going to put it in a museum or in some archive; we are going to consider it as a 
work of art. Without that political and social countersignature it would not be 
a work of art; there wouldn’t be a signature.13
We could continue saying that in all cultural representations there is no author without 
this possibility of recognition which is external to the very authorial act. In spite of it, 
we have often observed an unrestricted faith that, to get recognition as a “writer” or as 
an “author” or even as a personality, an individual has only to dominate the action of 
the writing and possess the talents required.
According to critics of authorship like Seán Burke, technology also shows us that 
there is little debate and loss of historicity in terms of what he links in a confused way 
to “postmodern” theorization.14 Burke’s theory concerning the problem of authorship is 
between poles that don’t appeal to each other and among increasingly wide fissures. On 
the one hand there is the model of the end of the author and on the other hand there 
are the defenders of authorship. However, the subjective issues and the political implica -
tions must be considered, above all if the thesis of the end of authorship defends the 
dissolution of subjectivity; and if it is in favor of utopian ideals based on a generalizing 
metaphysics of the presence and on a constraint of the individual. We know that the 
system of identity, founded under the stone of separation, exclusion, and autonomy is 
problematic, but the attempts to invert this system by the violence of state control under 
the intellectual patrimony and of the individuals’ productivity only resulted in a new 
side of the same coin. Collective authorship that defends the end of the author by means 
of appropriation and recombination can be read as movements that try to rethink the 
collectivity by means of the annihilation of self-reference and by questioning the con -
ception of consciousness and identity. In defending appropriation, the end of authorship 
and the forms derived from this thinking suggest an idea that man is the fruit of  
nonoriginality and, therefore, has no right to demand something that is not his. This 
concept originates from the ideas set forth by Foucault and Barthes.
The idea of production without the author is romantic, as well as the declaration of 
the end of authorship, because the conception that words came before us may indeed be 
a questioning opposite to the idea of originality and property, but it should be considered 
that perhaps there is something beyond humans and also that nature or something 
101
CAN I BORROW YOUR PROPER NAME?metaphysical is what guides him, not granting him the right to appropriate something 
that is not his. If this is taken into account, we can affirm that practically no human 
system will be original. But if we think that humankind is the creator and the first func -
tion of the ideality of what we conceive as “nature,” “soul” and “society,” among other 
things, the problem is addressed to the abstract set of human desires. The certainty that 
we are mere products of something beyond ourselves already demonstrates the origins of 
ideas concerned with recombination and appropriation, but it is always worth remem -
bering that without what we consider human, probably the sense of what is seen as natu -
ral is not logical nor illogical. What the conceptions of collective and recombination 
propose is the creation of a new origin that wouldn’t depend on humanity, but that once 
again would be thought, commanded and rearranged by humans. Who would be in 
charge of arranging and defining a nonoriginal real?
In this aspect, we can say that there was little progress in diluting the subject in favor 
of the crowd and, in several moments, what technologies offer in compensation is still 
very little in relation to the construction of a possible otherness that thinks itself above 
the technical apparatus.
What we see nowadays with discourses that defend the breakup of authorial param -
eters and promulgate the community as paradigm of authorship is the repetition of the 
history of exclusion of alterity. This structure doesn’t allow, in the same way as in the 
system of identity, that a kind of otherness has a face and a name, but it is organized 
around an identifying ideal that hopes to exclude identity. The result of this violent 
autonomy of the end of the name’s authority is a constant setup against the presupposi -
tions of the notions that form the subject’s particularities and that, in a certain way, lean 
on imaginary issues of psychic nature stimulated by a supposed encounter with what 
would configure humanity. Somehow we know that the reasons that take us more and 
more to dialog with the problem of authority and with the conceptions of the decen -
tralization of the power of authentication are, in some cases, connected to distressing 
movements related to contemporary humankind’s subjective position. What will I be if 
I am no longer an author? How will I sign? How will I perpetuate what I consider “inher -
ent” to me? The answer is not always easy, taking into account that the phantasmagoric 
constitution of the proper name will hardly cease to be, at least in contemporary socie -
ties like those we live in, taken into account as an element that forms the identity and 
that, consequently, is connected to some form of perpetuation, be it symbolic or not, of 
what will remain after us.
The end of authorship and of the author’s power can be considered as a complex 
presupposition and we don’t often find people willing to try to reconstitute the tissue 
linked to the plot of concepts that involve the authorial act. However, the way in which 
the dialog with the representational forms around power occurs should be reshaped and 
rethought. Open authorial systems and those without signatures should be relativized.
We can say that we are attached to the concept of identity through the relation to the 
notion of the self. The switch from an authorial social structure linked to subjectivity to 
the dissolution of the symbolic, as representing a solution for the impasse on the con -
centrated power around the author would incur the mistake of instituting another form 
of authority that would be close to the denial of the act of inscription. Perhaps the most 
distressing factor in this process is the subjective effacement consolidated by the emer -
gence of the recognition of an alterity through a phantasmagoric representation, which 
could run the risk of crystallizing in a movement as authoritarian as the contemporary 
capitalist system that we live in.
102
C. I. DA SIL VATaking into account the field of remix, Derrida’s position sustains the fact that the 
materiality of the production does not matter, but what really counts for the sake of 
ethics is society’s position in the reception and authentication of a cultural representa -
tion. This fact can be seen when a video with parts of other people’s content receives 
millions of views on an online video platform and no one complains about the fact that 
it was made using remix techniques. When remixing, someone is lending another’s 
signature to create a new one. Somehow Jacques Derrida questioned the limits with 
which the violence of authorship was imposed, but he also tried to present a dialog 
among the theories to imagine how we could build differentiated forms for the authen -
tication of a representation, as well as for the subjective creation.15
It seems, at least when we get in contact with what has been presented by thinkers of 
the end of authorship, that this concept is on the verge of the end, but what we can 
conclude is that few of those who make the apology for the end of the author take into 
account that such an end also presupposes the end of the signature and the recognition 
of the proper name. And maybe that’s the reason why most DJs and VJs use aliases to 
publicly sign their cultural production.
Notes
 1 Peter Brunette and David Wills, “The Spatial Arts: An Interview with Jacques Derrida,” in Deconstruction 
and the Visual Arts: Arts, Media, Architecture  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 18.
 2 Marilyn Randall, Pragmatic Plagiarism: Authorship, Profit, and Power (Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 2001), 58.
 3 Jacques Derrida, The Ear of the Other , ed. Christie McDonald (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 
1988), 76, quoted in Peggy Kamuf, Signature Pieces: On the Institution of Authorship  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1988), 4.
 4 Roland Barthes, “ La Mort de l’auteur ,” in Le Bruissement de la langue  (Paris, 1984); English translation by 
Stephen Heath for the collection  Image-Music-Text  (New York: Fontana, 1977), 148.
 5 Lev Manovich, “What Comes After Remix?” http://remixtheory.net/?p=169.
 6 In my view the “author” in its modern sense is a relatively recent invention. Specifically, it is the product 
of the rise in the eighteenth century of a new group of individuals: writers who sought to earn their live -
lihood from the sale of their writings to the new and rapidly expanding reading public.
   Martha Woodmansee, “The Genius and the Copyright: Economic and Legal Conditions of the 
Emergence of the ‘Author’,” Eighteenth-Century Studies  17, no. 4, Special Issue: The Printed World in the 
Eighteenth Century (1984), 426.
 7 Richard Grusin, “What Is an Electronic Author? Theory and the Technological Fallacy,” Configurations 
2, no. 3 (1994), 482.
 8 Andrew Bennett, The Author  (New York: Routledge, 2005), 13.
 9 Paul M. Zall, Literary Criticism of William Wordsworth  (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1966), 
182, in Martha Woodmansee, “The Genius and the Copyright,” 429.
10 Woodmansee, “The Genius and the Copyright,” 430.
11 Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?” in Twentieth-Century Literary Theory , eds. Vassilis Lambropoulos 
and David Neal Miller (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1987).
12 Brunette and Wills, “The Spatial Arts: An Interview With Jacques Derrida,” 18.
13 Ibid.
14 Seán Burke, The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault and Derrida  
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press 1998), 96.
15 For a more detailed view concerning the concept of collaborative writing, see Lisa Ede and Andrea A. 
Lunsford, “Collaboration and Concepts of Authorship,” PMLA  16, no. 2 (2001): 354–369.
103
CAN I BORROW YOUR PROPER NAME?Bibliography
Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” In Image-Music-Text . Translated and edited by Stephen 
Heath. New York: Fontana, 1977.
Bennett, Andrew. The Author . New York: Routledge, 2005.
Brunette, Peter and David Wills. (Eds). Deconstruction and the Visual Arts: Arts, Media, Architecture . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Burke, Seán. The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault and 
Derrida.  Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology . Translated by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1976.
Ede, Lisa, and Andrea A. Lunsford. “Collaboration and Concepts of Authorship.” PMLA , 16, no. 2 
(2001): 354–369.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” In Twentieth-Century Literary Theory , edited by Vassilis 
Lambropoulos and David Neal Miller. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1987.
Grusin, Richard. “What Is an Electronic Author? Theory and the Technological Fallacy.” Configurations  
2, no. 3 (1994): 469–483.
Kamuf, Peggy. Signature Pieces: On the Institution of Authorship . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1988.
Manovich, Lev. “What Comes After Remix?” Remix Theory , winter 2007. http://remixtheory.
net/?p=169 (accessed November 21, 2013).
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
Randall, Marilyn. Pragmatic Plagiarism: Authorship, Profit, and Power . Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 2001.
Woodmansee, Martha. “The Genius and the Copyright: Economic and Legal Conditions of the 
Emergence of the ‘Author’,” Eighteenth-Century Studies  17, no. 4, Special Issue: The Printed World 
in the Eighteenth Century (1984): 425–448.
7
THE EXTENDED REMIX
Rhetoric and History
Margie Borschke
Many scholars of digital technologies and networks have called “remix” the defining 
characteristic of digital culture, using it as shorthand for all that is new, digital, and 
participatory.1 This chapter offers a critique of such claims by comparing and contrasting 
the history of remix as an analog cultural practice and artifact with the discourse about 
remix in digital culture. It considers the use of “remix” in contemporary discourse as a 
rhetorical strategy and asks whether the assumptions and aspirations that underpin this 
rhetoric obscure the aesthetic priorities and the political implications of analog copying 
practices.
During the past half century, the meaning of “remix” changed: What began as a refer -
ence to a studio technique, musical form, and a marketing approach is now used meta -
phorically to describe media made from fragments of extant media.2 Although early 
remixes were produced using analog technologies, contemporary discourse tends to associ -
ate “remix” and “remix culture” with digital practices and artifacts. As such, remix is now 
associated with cut/copy/paste technologies,3 challenges to copyright and intellectual 
property,4 participatory media,5 grassroots social and political empowerment,6 social net -
working,7 user-generated content,8 and “commons-based peer production.”9 Some see 
remix as a challenge to the corporate ownership of culture,10 which either threatens late 
capitalism, or is just what capitalism needs to flourish in digital ecologies.11 Remix is used 
as shorthand for human creativity,12 an explanatory metaphor that illuminates the con -
nectedness of knowledge and expression (and the problems with romantic conceptions of 
authorship). Remix can be all-encompassing: it is at once new and old, electronic and 
natural. Or, as the title of a Web video series put it, “Everything Is a Remix.”13
Remix is a rhetorical trope in twenty-first century cultural scholarship,14 a metaphor 
that attempts to explain and often defend  creative works (especially those made with 
digital technologies) as analogous to dance remixes typical of the late twentieth century. 
Simultaneously, current narratives about remix and its underlying values are at odds 
with the particular history of remix as a musical practice and artifact. Examining this 
disjuncture offers insights about digital media technologies and cultural change.
The Shock of the New
Scholarship on remix is closely allied with arguments for copyright reform and, in recent 
years, with legal scholar Lawrence Lessig’s persuasive arguments about the overreach of 
105
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORYcopyright in an era of digital and network technologies.15 Lessig’s adoption of remix as 
a description of digital cultural practice is recent—earlier books explored and docu -
mented the tensions surrounding intellectual property, corporate control, and personal 
freedom but they did not employ remix as a metaphor.16 Given that “remix culture” has 
come to be so closely associated with Lessig’s arguments for copyright reform in the face 
of expansion, it is essential to tease out his definition of remix from its rhetorical use.17
For Lessig, remix is a digital media practice, one that describes a variety of sample-
based and digitally manipulated media artifacts, many of which are contested because 
they violate the copyright of the work they sample. Lessig argues that the regulation of 
expression was not the intention of copyright law and yet, these laws now criminalize 
artists like the laptop DJ-producer, known as Girl Talk, who composes music using hun -
dreds of recognizable samples from pop songs.18 Lessig claims that Girl Talk’s “remixes,” 
should be recognized as a new form of expression,19 and as speech.20 Lessig further argues 
that remix should also be understood as a participatory mode of creativity, one that 
marks a return to Jeffersonian ideals of democratic discourse.21
Valorizing the “new” as an engine of innovation is characteristic of modernist think -
ing. Yet, as Charles Acland argues, a preoccupation with the new also “betrays a concern 
about the past.”22 This dance between past and present is evident in Lessig’s characteri -
zation of remix. He presents remix as a new form of expression, one made possible by 
technological progress and enabled by the mass uptake of digital and network technolo -
gies at the turn of the twenty-first century.23 Simultaneously, Lessig claims that this 
digital-remix culture marks a return to something that was lost in the twentieth century, 
something “natural” that this new cultural practice has reinvigorated, but copyright laws 
still threaten. Lessig’s conceptualization of remix attempts to naturalize digital expres -
sion, to connect it to free speech, while rendering other sorts of mediated expression 
inauthentic.
Submerged in Lessig’s characterization of remix as new is an assumption that technol -
ogy is inevitable and progressive—an assumption disputed by Friedman,24 among others. 
Lessig describes contemporary life as “a world in which technology begs all of us to cre -
ate and spread creative work differently from how it was created and spread before.”25 In 
doing so, Lessig grants agency to digital technologies while rendering users of the recent 
past passive. His technologies have expectations and natural trajectories: they plead 
with us. Remix is seen as an inevitable consequence of technological change, a position 
that assumes that technology is progressive, that old technologies are rendered obsolete 
by newfangled ones.26 He assumes that if a technology is possible, it is inevitable—and 
that culture will be pushed forward in its wake. Friedman argues that technological 
determinism such as this is typical of the libertarian ethic that dominates popular think -
ing about the Internet, and has become computer culture’s “common-sense theory of 
history,”27 despite evidence to the contrary.28 Technological determinists often speculate 
about the future by ignoring the past,29 a tendency that is a particular problem for Lessig’s 
understanding of remix as “new” in the face of its own lengthy history.
Schulz argues that determinism “enables the rhetor to make irrefutable prophecies, 
deflect responsibility when a technology proves deficient, downplay opposing positions 
and assert their own authority as seers of the future.”30 Friedman’s analysis of cyberuto -
pianism offers another insight into how technological determinism functions in an  
argument such as Lessig’s: “Technological determinism actually functions as a cover, 
authorizing a safe space in which to articulate utopian values.”31 Lessig’s understanding 
of remix as an inevitable consequence of technological progress constructs what 
106
M. BORSCHKEFriedman calls a “utopian sphere: the space in public discourse where, in a society that 
in so many ways has given up on imagining anything better than multinational capital -
ism, there’s still room to dream of different kinds of futures.”32 The rhetoric of remix 
shelters Lessig from a key libertarian dilemma, one that copyright seems to bring to the 
fore: How to simultaneously protect free speech and free markets in the digital sphere?
Falling Down the Analog Hole, or Why We  
Never Were “Read-Only”
For Lessig, recent improvements to digital and network technologies altered the average 
person’s relationship with both cultural products and media production and caused a 
shift in “cultures of creativity.”33 Lessig describes this new culture as “Read/Write,” in 
contrast to the “Read-Only” media culture of the twentieth century when the available 
media technologies prevented the modification of cultural artifacts (e.g., vinyl records, 
televised broadcasts, etc.).34 Culture was something that was made by professionals and 
passively consumed by everyone else. It was the era of the couch potato.35
However, remix has a history that predates digital technologies and this history trou -
bles this characterization of the past. The first recordings that were made and sold as 
“remixes” date to the mid-1970s, in New York City36 where the new form was closely 
associated with the ascendance of a new dance culture that used recorded music in tan -
dem with playback technologies to create nonstop dancing.37 DJs were instrumental in 
the development of technique and remix aesthetics, building on their understanding of 
the “dance floor dynamic” to produce the first commercial remixes as 12-inch singles in 
mid-1976.38 Not all alternate versions were commissioned and paid for by labels—some 
DJs were also making unauthorized edits of songs on reel-to-reel and having them 
pressed on acetate, and this practice would have an impact on the aesthetic. Access and 
permission are key distinctions between the unauthorized edits and the commissioned 
remixes.39 Each producer worked with a different set of sonic possibilities because they 
had access to different sets of sounds. Edit makers, who were constrained by the mixed 
sounds of the commercial release, would listen for certain sonic elements in a song such 
as a drum break. Remixers, on the other hand, had access to the multitrack master 
recordings and were thus able to isolate and manipulate individual layers in a mix, 
thereby expanding their sonic options.
Yet it is text rather than music that Lessig cites when explaining his understanding of 
remix. For him, remix is a new form of quotation, one that can be layered and mixed.40 
As such, referencing via juxtaposition and superimposition, as well as knowledge about 
the primary source, are crucial to his understanding of remix. The musical practice of 
remixing, however, is not necessarily dependent on contextual quotation. When a 
remixer omits vocals, filters the horns, or adds percussion, the tracks that are altered or 
rearranged aren’t being referenced, rather, they are used differently (or not at all).
Lessig’s emphasis on the generation of meaning via referencing and his preoccupation 
with creating conversations between media sources is accompanied by a judgment about 
what constitutes a “good” remix. He writes, “Remixed media succeed when they show 
others something new; they fail when they are trite or derivative.”41 In other words, 
“good” remixes build new meaning by playing with the meaning of old. Dance remixes, 
however, are derivative by definition. They began as DJ tools, and the aim was to make 
a song easier for a DJ to use: The remix might make the song more danceable, or more 
suitable for radio play. A cappellas, dubs, bonus beats, and extended mixes were versions 
107
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORYthat made it easier for a DJ to mix the record with other records (that is, to play them 
simultaneously), while other remixes appeal to certain styles or genres of music (e.g., a 
label might commission a house version and a hip hop mix), or hope for additional 
attention (and sales) by hiring a well-known remixer. Complicating matters further, 
there are occasions when only the remix is released or known—some remixes can be 
seen as attempts to save bad songs from themselves,42 with no “original” for the listener 
to reference. My point is not that this technical meaning of remix has priority over the 
extension of the metaphor (and, of course, the techniques used to remix are indistin -
guishable from the tools used to mix any number of tracks), but that this extended 
understanding of remix must also be able to accommodate the technique’s origins and 
continued use.
Lessig’s preoccupation with generating meaning over derivations, however, has a spe -
cific rhetorical aim related to his desire to reform current copyright regimes. By aligning 
remix with cultural commentary and the established practice of referencing in art and 
literature, Lessig leads us toward the notion of fair use in copyright and builds a case that 
their use is transformative. But is this clever solution also a problem?
In her work on the contradictions in legal debates about the First Amendment and 
fair use provisions in US copyright law, Rebecca Tushnet draws attention to the empha -
sis on transformative use and how this potentially devalues copying and overlooks its 
role in free speech. Tushnet argues, “The rhetoric of transformative use can then be 
applied in non-transformative cases to devalue pure copying.”43 She explains that 
emphasis on critical commentary over everyday use might leave many other kinds of 
speech acts vulnerable. “While using fair use to protect artists from censorship is appeal -
ing, other forms of copying are also integral to free speech today.”44 She warns that fair 
use and free speech are not the same thing:
Using fair use and free speech as interchangeable concepts thus has a profound 
and negative narrowing effect on the scope of fair use and in turn threatens First 
Amendment freedoms, because noncritical uses of copyrighted works have sub -
stantial value to society and to freedom of speech.45
In Tushnet’s opinion, not only does an emphasis on transformative use defend some 
practices and not others, but it might also play into the hands of the opposition: “An 
exclusive focus on transformation in thinking about copyright and freedom of speech is 
likely to support further expansions of copyright.”46
Copying music was already an important consumption practice in music culture in 
the analog era,47 and the networked environment amplifies the role of copies in expres -
sion.48 I do not wish to dispute Lessig’s assertion that what technology enables and what 
the law allows are out of sync, and that difficult policy battles need to be fought. My 
concern is that the rhetoric of remix distracts us from a deeper understanding of the 
affordances of copies and fragmentation in general and the particular affordances of 
digital copies.
Won’t Someone Think of the Amateurs?
Remix culture has also come to be associated with the democratization of media produc -
tion, a shift from the passive consumers of the broadcast era (think couch potatoes) to 
the active participants of Web 2.0 (think citizen-journalists). Many scholars see remix 
108
M. BORSCHKEas a form of empowerment and resistance, a storming of the gates of corporate mass 
media by “the people formerly known as the audience.”49 For some, this empowerment 
is an opportunity to forge new business models that sit comfortably in the continuum of 
late capitalism, while, for others, remix culture represents a wedge against corporate 
power structures and a challenge to the commodification of culture. The notion of a 
remix culture is often aligned or associated with Henry Jenkins’s conceptualization of a 
participatory culture.50 Indeed, Lessig builds much of his argument about remix on the 
strength of Jenkins’s work on convergence and participation.51 But is this celebration of 
participation underpinned by an assumption of passive reception? And is this a problem? 
Does the valorization of production denigrate the cultural worth of consumption?
Lessig looks back to the turn of the twentieth century to argue that “remix culture” can be 
understood as a return to what was lost when culture became professionalized.52 Digital remix 
marks the triumphant (if contested) return of the amateur and the rise of a participatory 
ethos, one that rouses ordinary folk from their “couch-potato stupor.”53 However, in music 
culture the division between professionals and amateurs is not always clear-cut nor does it 
seem that digital technologies are the only ones that encourage participation. Numerous 
genres and scenes—from rock to electronic dance music—owe their existence to innova -
tions and collaborations among self-trained, untrained, and semi-professional musicians and 
their “audiences” of listeners, dancers, and hangers-on. Jason Toynbee’s research suggests that 
the advent of the recording industry in the twentieth century increased participation in 
music culture in part because the mass circulation of recordings were used by amateur musi -
cians to learn their craft.54 The music industry in the twentieth century is less about the  
rise of the professional than it is about the commodification of culture—the commercial 
exploitation of music’s objectification. In addition, Paul Théberge argues that the advent of 
low-cost digital technologies in the early 1980s (e.g., samplers and sequencers) marks a 
moment in which a “key innovation was the ‘production’ of musicians as consumers  of high 
technology.”55 While Lessig rightly asserts that the tools available today cost a fraction of 
what they once did, he fails to acknowledge that amateurs and starving professionals did rent 
studios, that they did buy low-cost samplers when they became available in the late 1980s,56 
that home studios were still within reach in the early 1990s—costing around $1,00057—and 
that many made use of cheaper tape technologies to achieve creative ends. The practice of 
remixing was forged by these strategies of use and making do with whatever technology was 
at hand. These strategies support an understanding of consumption practices such as listen -
ing, viewing, and reading as active rather than passive and these consumer innovations 
continue to shape the aesthetic of reuse.
By denying agency and innovation to past users, Lessig obscure an understanding of 
how their consumption practices shaped ours and how use shapes expression. It is clear 
that current copyright laws pose threats to creative reuse and present a particular threats 
for amateur practice58 (or even to professional practice that does not have deep pockets) 
but it is problematic to attempt to defend amateur creativity by denying the role of 
everyday use in shaping the culture of the recent past.
Is Remix Resistance?
In 1977 Jacques Attali theorized that the political economy of music foreshadowed 
changes elsewhere in society and he hoped that the era of repetition might give way to 
an era of pure composition citing pirate recordings and illegal radio stations as possible 
signs of revolution.59 Is remix a revolutionary form?
109
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORYWhereas Lessig’s argument ultimately sits comfortably within the existing economic 
and social order, other scholars conceptualize remix as a resistance  to capitalism and 
commercial culture.60 Bernard Schütze, for instance, sees remix not only as a resistance 
to the status quo, but by definition, as a subversive form.61 While Lessig views markets 
as beyond question and copyright as a policy that needs reform, Schütze’s understanding 
of remix is one that challenges these same institutions and structures: He values sharing 
over ownership, openness over originality, and process over product. Remix, for Schütze, 
is “an aesthetic of impurity, and an ideology of unrestricted circulation.”62 It is a chal -
lenge to existing orders and institutions, a strategy, and a process (“a verb not a noun”),63 
rather than a category or a product.
Schütze distinguishes between remixes he sees as acts of resistance from those that are 
in bed with the mainstream. He argues, “ Remix culture  . . . upholds the remix as an 
open challenge to a culture predicated on exclusive ownership, authorship, and con -
trolled distribution.”64 It’s not clear that we can cast aside the music industry’s role in 
the history of remix (or of remakes, in other areas of media) because of political prefer -
ences. What if the remake culture Schütze sniffs at and the underground practices he 
admires have something in common? Schütze and Lessig may have different political 
agendas, but both value the potential for remixes to offer commentary and criticism. 
They value narrative or discursive remixes and disparage the nonnarrative (or, in musi -
cal terms, musematic) versions as derivative. Valuing narrative over other kinds of 
expression is not a problem in and of itself, but, in this case, it suppresses an important 
chapter in the history of remix—that of the musematic, or “repetition at the level of the 
short figure,”65 as is common in dance remixing and editing and this preoccupation is a 
problem for the rhetoric of remix.
In the visual arts, remix is often considered part of a continuum of reuse that had 
already surfaced in a number of modernist forms—collage, pastiche, bricolage, for example—  
but is also seen as quintessentially postmodern, a strategy of resistance borrowed from 
particular cultures of popular music.66 This flattening of a variety of forms and processes 
seeks to resurrect an association with the avant-garde at the same time that it declares 
its impossibility.67 Resistance is seen as inherent to the process of fragmentation and 
reuse.
There is an historical problem with the idea that fragmentation is a resistance; that 
is, the professional aspirations of the various players who contributed to the aesthetic 
of remix, coupled with the commercial interests that helped to establish social and 
distribution networks among these players,68 seem to challenge the view that remix as 
a form aims to oppose existing hierarchies. The tendency to romanticize the contribu -
tions of the amateur over the professional does not entirely mesh with the history of 
remix in music. Many of the early edits and unauthorized remixes were treated as 
calling cards by marginalized professionals—DJs—who wanted to join the mainstream 
industry. While some would come to embrace their status on the margins, many 
aspired to stardom. However, we also know that unauthorized remixes—appropria -
tions of images, sounds, and so on—have been used as “a tactical assault on commod -
ity culture,” as video artist Dan Angeloro suggests.69 Has appropriation as a tactic 
merely been appropriated as a consumption practice? Or is the meaning of a form a 
question of use rather than something inherent in the structure and confines of the 
form itself? This is not to say that Angeloro and others are incorrect to ascribe “power” 
to the fragment: Fragmentation is a kind of replication; isolation has aesthetic affor -
dances and possibilities.
110
M. BORSCHKEThe history of fragmentation in music, however, complicates the valorization of remix 
as resistance—in a way that the history of fragmentation in the visual arts may not. In 
music, it seems that the aesthetic of remix stems from a number of separate music cul -
tures and processes (dubs in Jamaica, disco and hip hop in New York, musique concrète , 
tape edits, and so on). The role of disco in the foundation of remix is often overlooked 
and instead the birth of remix is more closely associated with its ascendance in hip 
hop,70 thereby associating the metaphor with the political struggles of Black America 
rather than with the marketing of popular culture and leisure, or with formal experimen -
tation in high art, all of which are part of the history of musical remix. Fragmentation 
may be a more neutral strategy (or, at least, a more objective one) than the current meta -
phorical use of remix implies. The outlaw status of sampling as a musical process stems 
from its relationship to copyright law, not from its status as a fragment. Hence, the 
assumption that fragmentation has the status of resistance can only be attributed to 
certain remixes, but not all of them.
Conclusion: Why the History of Remix Matters
Studying remix as rhetoric offers lessons about the interrelationship between con -
sumption, reception, and distribution in the creation of meaning. The vogue for using 
remix as a metaphor for all creativity obscures the particular history of remix in dance 
music, and carries with it a number of assumptions about technology and consumption 
that are problematic. Remix is a fuzzy metaphor, one that is used to defend new modes 
of participatory digital media engagement, while simultaneously denying agency to 
users of the recent past.
By foregrounding remix as a rhetorical strategy, I aim to recover these recent histo -
ries of use and to highlight the role of copies and copying in these histories.71 Any 
theory of contemporary media culture must grapple with the persistence of the copy 
or fragment as a compositional unit, something that is shared by both analog and digi -
tal media. As rhetoric, remix asks us to overlook the copy, to instead focus on notions 
of transformative use. Though there may be localized legal and political reasons to do 
so, it fails to provide a rich description of cultural practice. Remix is neither new nor 
digital. As is true for most artifacts and practices from music culture, the borders 
between amateurs and professionals, commerce and culture, young and old, performer 
and audience are poorly defined. If we want to understand the role copies play in 
contemporary composition, we would do better to think not of their meaning, but of 
their use.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank James Bucknell (University of New South Wales), Kate 
Crawford (Microsoft Research) and Catharine Lumby (Macquarie University) for dis -
cussions and critiques that informed and enriched this work. Some of the material in 
this chapter appeared in “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.” Media International 
Australia  141 (November, 2011): 17–25 and is included with permission.
111
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORYNotes
 1 E.g., Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (London: 
Bloomsbury 2008); Lev Manovich, “Remixability and Modularity,” October–November 2005, http://
manovich.net/index.php/projects/remixability-and-modularity; Bernard Schütze, “Samples from the 
Heap: Notes on Recycling the Detritus of a Remixed Culture,” Horizon Zero  8 (2003): http://www.hori -
zonzero.ca/textsite/remix.php?is=8&file=5&tlang=0. For further discussion see Margaret Borschke, 
“Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix: Copies and Material Culture in Digital Networks” (PhD dissertation, 
University of New South Wales, 2012), 80–132.
 2 E.g., Manovich, “Remixability and Modularity.”
 3 E.g., Schütze, “Samples from the Heap.”
 4 E.g., Lessig, Remix .
 5 E.g., Henry Jenkins, Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009).
 6 E.g., Richard L. Edwards and Chuck Tryon, “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen 
Empowerment.” First Monday  14, no. 10 (2009): http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/
fm/article/view/2617/2305.
 7 E.g., Andréa Davis, Suzanne Webb, Dundee Lackey, and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss “Remix, Play, and 
Remediation: Undertheorized Composing Practices,” in Writing and the Digital Generation: Essays on New 
Media Rhetoric , ed. Heather Urbanski (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 2010), 186–197.
 8 E.g., Edward Lee, “Warming Up to User-Generated Content,” Illinois Law Review  1459 (2008):  
1544–1545.
 9 Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom  
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 60.
10 E.g., Schütze, “Samples from the Heap.”
11 E.g., Lessig, Remix ; Matt Mason, The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism  
(New York: Free Press, 2008).
12 E.g., Eduardo Navas, “Remix: A Critical Analysis of Allegory, Intertexuality, and Sampling in Art, Music, 
and Media” (PhD dissertation, University of California and San Diego State University, 2009).
13 Kirby Ferguson, “Everything Is a Remix,” 2010, http://www.everythingisaremix.info/.
14 This builds on Ted Friedman’s interrogation of techno-utopianism (cf. Ted Friedman, Electric Dreams: 
Computers in American Culture  (New York: New York University Press, 2005)), and David Paul 
Schulz’s analysis of technological determinism as a rhetorical trope (cf. David Paul Schulz, “The 
Rhetorical Contours of Technological Determinism” (PhD dissertation, Pennsylvania State 
University, 2002)).
15 Cf. Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World (New York: 
Vintage, 2002); Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down 
Culture and Control Creativity  (New York: Penguin, 2004); and Lessig, Remix .
16 Cf. Lessig, The Future of Ideas and Free Culture .
17 As Steven A. Hetcher points out, Lessig never defines the term. Steven A. Hetcher, “Using Social Norms 
to Regulate Fan Fiction and Remix Culture,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review  157 (2008): 1871.
18 Lessig, Remix .
19 Ibid.
20 Lawrence Lessig, “Lawrence Lessig: Laws that Choke Creativity,” TED , 2007, http://www.ted.com/talks/
larry_lessig_says_the_law_is_strangling_creativity.html.
21 See Lessig, Remix , 27.
22 Charles Acland, “Residual Media.” in Residual Media , ed. Charles Acland (Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2007), xv.
23 Lessig, Remix , 18.
24 Friedman,  Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture.
25 Lessig, Remix , xviii.
26 Ibid., 30, 39.
27 Friedman, Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture, 27.
112
M. BORSCHKE28 Ted Friedman, “Electric Dreams: Computer Culture and the Utopian Sphere” (PhD dissertation, Duke 
University, 1999), 105.
29 Ibid., 14.
30 Schulz, “The Rhetorical Contours of Technological Determinism,” 38.
31 Friedman,  Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture , 5.
32 Ibid., 4.
33 Ibid., 18.
34 Ibid., 20–31.
35 Ibid., 29.
36 Cf. Tim Lawrence, Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003); and William Straw, “Value and Velocity: The 12-Inch Single as 
Medium and Artifact,” in Popular Music Studies , ed. K. Negus and D. Hesmondhalgh (London: Edward 
Arnold, 2002).
37 There were other commercial precedents: notably 1960s Jamaican dubplates were commissioned by sound 
systems and labels to create excitement on the dance floor in advance of a record’s release and to get 
customers into the clubs. For a discussion see Jason Toynbee, Making Popular Music: Musicians, Creativity 
and Institutions  (London: Arnold, 2000), xvii.
38 Tim Lawrence, Hold On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell and the Downtown Music Scene, 1973–1992 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009), 129.
39 Cf. Margie Borschke, “Disco Edits and their Discontents: The Persistence of the Analog in a Digital Era,” 
New Media & Society  13, no. 6 (2011): 929–944; and Borschke, “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix,” 
133–185.
40 Lessig, Remix , 69.
41 Ibid., 82.
42 Rob Tannenbaum, “Remix, Rematch, Reprofit. Then Dance.” The New York Times , August 30, 1992, 
Factiva.
43 Rebecca Tushnet, “Copy This Essay: How Fair Use Doctrine Harms Free Speech and How Copying 
Serves It,” Yale Law Journal  114, no. 3 (2004): 561.
44 Ibid., 545.
45 Ibid., 537.
46 Ibid., 553.
47 Lee Marshall “Infringers,” In Music & Copyright , ed. L. Marshall and S. Frith (New York: Routledge, 
2004), 196.
48 Margie Borschke, “Ad Hoc Archivists: MP3 Blogs and Digital Provenance.” Continuum: Journal of Media 
& Cultural Studies  26, no. 1 (2012): 1–10; and “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.”
49 Jay Rosen, “The People Formerly Known as the Audience,” PressThink (blog), posted June 27, 2006. 
http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr.html.
50 Patrik Wikstrom, The Music Industry: Music in the Cloud  (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009).
51 Lessig, Remix , 28, 78, 81, 94, 206, 207, 212, 276.
52 Ibid., 29.
53 Ibid., 254.
54 Toynbee, Making Popular Music , 74.
55 Théberge, Paul, Any Sound You Can Imagine: Making Music/Consuming Technology, Music/Culture  
(Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1997): 70–71. See also Toynbee, Making Popular Music.
56 Kembrew McLeod, “How Copyright Law Changed Hip Hop: An Interview with Public Enemy’s Chuck 
D and Hank Shocklee,” Stay Free  20 (2004): 22–25.
57 E.g., M. Saunders. “Getting Hip to Pop.” Boston Globe , May 9, 1993, Factiva.
58 Among the problems with the rhetoric of remix is its tendency to avoid examples of digital expression 
involving straightforward replication. For a discussion of the creative use of copies in MP3 blogs see 
Borschke, “Ad Hoc Archivists”  and “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.”
59 Jacques Attali, Noise: The Political Economy of Music . Translated by B. Massumi (Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1985), 5, 20. NB It is worth highlighting that Attali’s work was informed 
by analog recording and broadcast technologies rather than digital ones.
60 E.g., Bart Vautour, “Remix Culture,” in Contemporary Youth Culture: An International Encyclopedia , ed. S. 
R. Steinberg, P . Parmar, and B. Richard (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2006): 306; Schütze, “Samples 
from the Heap.”
61 Schütze, “Samples from the Heap.”
113
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORY62 Ibid.
63 Ibid.
64 Ibid.
65 Richard Middleton, “Form,” in Key Terms in Popular Music and Culture , ed. B. Horner and T. Swiss 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1999): 146.
66 Cf. Navas, “Remix: A Critical Analysis.”
67 Cf. Rosalind E. Krauss, The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths  (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1985).
68 Straw, “Value and Velocity .”
69 Dan Angeloro, “Thoughtware: Contemporary Online Remix Culture,” in  SynCity , ed. Mark Titmarsh 
(Sydney: dLux Media Arts, 2006): 25.
70 Cf. Lawrence, Remix .
71 Borschke, “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.”
Bibliography
Acland, Charles. “Residual Media.” In Residual Media , edited by Charles Acland, xiii–xxvii. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
Angeloro, Dan. “Thoughtware: Contemporary Online Remix Culture.” In  SynCity , edited by Mark 
Titmarsh, 18–25. Sydney: dLux Media Arts, 2006.
Attali, Jacques. Noise: The Political Economy of Music . Translated by B. Massumi. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1985.
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Borschke, Margie. “Disco Edits and their Discontents: The Persistence of the Analog in a Digital Era.” 
New Media & Society  13, no. 6 (2011): 929–944.
———. “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix.” Media International Australia  141, November (2011): 
17–25.
———. “Ad Hoc Archivists: MP3 Blogs and Digital Provenance.” Continuum: Journal of Media & 
Cultural Studies  26, no. 1 (2012): 1–10.
———. “Rethinking the Rhetoric of Remix: Copies and Material Culture in Digital Networks” PhD 
dissertation, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2012.
Bruns, Axel. Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life, and Beyond: From Production to Produsage . New York: Peter 
Lang, 2008.
Burgess, Jean. “Vernacular Creativity, Cultural Participation and New Media Literacy: Photography 
and the flickr Network.” Paper presented at Internet Research 7.0: Internet Convergences (AoIR) , 
Brisbane, September 28–30, 2006.———. “Vernacular Creativity and the New Media.” PhD 
dissertation, Queensland University of Technology, 2007.
Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture . Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 2009.
Chanan, M. Repeated Takes: A Short History of Recording and Its Effects on Music . London: Verso, 1995.
Davis, Andréa, Suzanne Webb, Dundee Lackey, and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss. “Remix, Play, and 
Remediation: Undertheorized Composing Practices.” In Writing and the Digital Generation: Essays 
on New Media Rhetoric , edited by Heather Urbanski, 186–197. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & 
Company, 2010.
Diakopoulos, N., K. Luther, Y. E. Medynskiy, and I. Essa. “The Evolution of Authorship in a Remix 
Society.” In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia . Manchester, UK, 
2007: 133–136.
Edwards, R., and C. Tryon. “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen Empowerment.” First 
Monday  14, no. 10 (2009). http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/2617/2305 (accessed July 30, 2014).
114
M. BORSCHKEFerguson, K. Everything is a Remix , 2010. http://www.everythingisaremix.info/ (accessed July 30, 2014).
Friedman, Ted. “Electric Dreams: Computer Culture and the Utopian Sphere.” PhD dissertation, Duke 
University, 1999.
———. Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture . New York: New York University Press, 
2005.
Hennion, A. “Music Lovers: Taste as Performance.” Theory Culture and Society  18, no. 5 (2001): 1–22.
———. “Listen!” Music and Arts in Action  1, no. 1 (2008): 36–45.
Hetcher, Steven. A. “Using Social Norms to Regulate Fan Fiction and Remix Culture.” University of 
Pennsylvania Law Review  157 (2008): 1869–1935.
Jenkins, Henry. Fans, Blogger, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory Culture . New York: New York 
University Press, 2006.
———. Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009.
Krauss, Rosalind E. The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1985.
Lawrence, Tim. Love Saves the Day: A History of American Dance Music Culture, 1970–1979 . Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
———. “Disco Madness: Walter Gibbons and the Legacy of Turntablism and Remixology.” Journal of 
Popular Music Studies  20, no. 3 (2008): 276–329.
———. Hold On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell and the Downtown Music Scene, 1973–1992 . Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2009.
Lee, Edward. “Warming Up to User-Generated Content.” Illinois Law Review  1459 (2008): 1544–1545.
Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World . New York: 
Vintage, 2002.
———. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control 
Creativity . New York: Penguin, 2004.
———. “The People Own Ideas.” Technology Review , June 2005. http://www.technologyreview.com/
communications/14505/ (accessed July 30, 2014).
———. “Larry Lessig on Laws that Choke Creativity.” TED , 2007. http://www.ted.com/talks/larry_
lessig_says_the_law_is_strangling_creativity.html (accessed July 30, 2014).
———. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . London: Bloomsbury, 2008.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
———. “Remixability and Modularity.” October–November, 2005. http://manovich.net/index.php/
projects/remixability-and-modularity (accessed July 30, 2014).
Marshall, Lee. “Infringers.” In Music & Copyright , edited by L. Marshall and S. Frith, 189–207.  
New York: Routledge, 2004.
Mason, Matt. The Pirate’s Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism . New York: Free Press, 
2008.
McLeod, Kembrew. “How Copyright Law Changed Hip Hop: An Interview with Public Enemy’s 
Chuck D and Hank Shocklee.” Stay Free 20 (2004): 22–25.
Middleton, Richard. “In the Groove, or Blowing Your Mind? The Pleasures of Musical Repetition.” In 
Popular Culture and Social Relations , edited by T. Bennett, C. Mercer, and J. Woollacott, 159–176. 
Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1986.
———. “Form.” In Key Terms in Popular Music and Culture , edited by B. Horner and T. Swiss, 141–155. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 1999.
Navas, Eduardo. “Remix: A Critical Analysis of Allegory, Intertexuality, and Sampling in Art, Music, 
and Media.” PhD dissertation. University of California and San Diego State University, San Diego, 
CA, 2009.
———. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” In Mashup Cultures , edited by S. 
Sonvilla-Weiss, 157–177. New York: Springer, 2010.
Rosen, Jay. “The People Formerly Known as the Audience.” PressThink (blog). Posted June 27, 2006. 
http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr.html (accessed July 30, 2014).
115
THE EXTENDED REMIX: RHETORIC AND HISTORYSaunders, M. “Getting Hip to Pop.” Boston Globe , May 9, 1993, Factiva.
Schloss, Joseph G. Making Beats: The Art of Sample-Based Hip-Hop . Middletown, CT: Wesleyan 
University Press, 2004.
Schulz, David Paul. “The Rhetorical Contours of Technological Determinism.” PhD dissertation, 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 2002.
Schütze, Bernard. “Samples From the Heap: Notes on Recycling the Detritus of a Remixed Culture.” 
Horizon Zero , no. 8, 2003, http://www.horizonzero.ca/textsite/remix.php?is=8&file=5&tlang=0 
(accessed July 30, 2014).
Straw, William. “Value and Velocity: The 12-Inch Single as Medium and Artifact.” In Popular Music 
Studies , edited by K. Negus and D. Hesmondhalgh, 164–177. London: Edward Arnold, 2002.
Tannenbaum, Rob. “Remix, Rematch, Reprofit. Then Dance.” The New York Times , August 30, 1992, 
Factiva.
Théberge, Paul. Any Sound You Can Imagine: Making Music/Consuming Technology, Music/Culture . 
Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1997.
Toynbee, Jason. Making Popular Music: Musicians, Creativity and Institutions . London: Arnold, 2000.
———. “Musicians.” In Music & Copyright , edited by L. Marshall and S. Frith, 123–138. New York: 
Routledge, 2004.
Tushnet, Rebecca. “Copy This Essay: How Fair Use Doctrine Harms Free Speech and How Copying 
Serves It.” Yale Law Journal  114, no. 3 (2004): 535–592.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity . New York: New York University Press, 2003.
Vautour, Bart “Remix Culture.” In Contemporary Youth Culture: An International Encyclopedia , edited 
by S. R. Steinberg, P . Parmar, and B. Richard, 306–310. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2006.
Wikstrom, Patrik. The Music Industry: Music in the Cloud . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009.
1168
CULTURE AND REMIX
A Theory on Cultural Sublation
Eduardo Navas
Remix culture is a term increasingly used to explain basic principles of creativity and 
individual expression since the mid to late 1990s.1 Given its common usage, the nature 
of the compound term’s dependence on a complex history may not seem obvious. When 
evaluating the relation of remix  to culture  at times one may ask, “What kind of culture 
are we becoming when we consider remixing an important element in creative produc -
tion?” And, “What exactly is culture?” In this line of questioning, it becomes evident 
that in order to understand in depth what role remix plays in culture it is necessary to 
define with precision the term “culture.” This should make possible a discussion about 
the possibilities and limitations of remix, not only in terms of remix culture, which is a 
concept in large part informed and shaped by Creative Commons, but also culture in 
the larger context of history. The following, then, is a brief analysis in which I first 
define culture to then evaluate its relation to remix. The concept of the avant-garde is 
presented as a cultural example in which remixing is at play explicitly on two layers that 
I define as the framework of culture .2 I also analyze how social media relies on the frame -
work of culture to develop a new type of economy. This analysis will expose the reasons 
why, historically, creative production appears to resist established patterns of produc -
tion, but eventually is sublated by cultural economies and becomes vital to capital as a 
whole.
Culture Defined
All cultural critics (as their title implies) have to assume a concise idea of culture. T wo 
cultural critics who have taken the time to define culture at length are Raymond 
Williams, who published his theories around the 1950s, and Terry Eagleton, who became 
an authority as a surveyor of culture, due to his focus on the subject particularly in the 
1980s. Eagleton defines culture by referencing the definitions of Williams, as well as  
T. S. Eliot. In Eagleton’s definition, one comes away with a sense of culture defined, 
unapologetically, by the West. He argues that as Western thought has spread throughout 
the world, it has been able to make claims to a certain way of thinking that affects other 
cultures that did not hold Western values.3 Eagleton also points out that culture origi -
nates in nature and is defined by labor. Culture is nature modified according to the 
interests of individuals who perform a specific form of manual work: “We derive our 
word for the finest of human activities from labour and agriculture, crops and 
117
CULTURE AND REMIXcultivation.”4 Eagleton discusses at some length how culture developed a sense of resist -
ance, especially in the nineteenth century; for him, such resistance has links to the rise 
of the avant-garde during the same time period.
According to Raymond Williams, the fact that art became a value in and of itself at 
times separated from everyday life was the result of a preoccupation with cultural 
changes that started around 1790, and climaxed around 1945. Part of the cultural strug -
gle since the end of World War II, Williams argues, had been to find ways to reintegrate 
the value of art back into the everyday.5 Williams divides the separation of art and 
everyday life into three stages: the first from 1790 to 1870, when industrialism rapidly 
developed; the second from 1870 to 1914, when specializations started to become the 
norm; and finally, 1914 to 1945, a time when the specializations of the second period 
kept developing, but became complicated by the rise of mass media and large 
corporations.6
The stages, as outlined by Williams, trace the history of modernity as it is commonly 
understood. For Williams, culture came to signify a type of resistance in search of mean -
ing against the rise of capital, where the exile (his own term)—the cultural critic, or the 
mythologist (as it would come to be renamed by Roland Barthes in the 1960s)7—has 
some critical distance to reflect on the developments of the world. Picking up where 
Williams left off, Eagleton reflects with certain disappointment on what the term culture 
meant during modern times:
The concept of culture grew up as a critique of middle-class society, not as an 
ally of it. Culture was about value not prices, the moral rather than the mate -
rial, the high-minded rather than the philistine.  . . . It was the rickety shelter 
where the values and energies which industrial capitalism had no use for could 
take refuge.  . . . From its patrician height, it scorned the shopkeepers and stock -
brokers swarming in the commercial badlands below.8
In Eagleton’s claim we find a clear definition of one type of culture aligned with the 
aura of the arts and intellectuality. According to critical theorist Andrew Arato, this is 
the same culture with which previous intellectuals such as the Frankfurt School mem -
bers identified.9 Arato argues that this culture is ambiguously complemented by another 
concept of culture that, at least since the 1790s, went through the same evolution that 
Williams has outlined. This type of culture consists of shared traditions, institutions, and 
a wide spectrum of activities that come to define a person’s identity.10 During the begin -
ning of the twenty-first century, this other culture is dependent on mass communication 
and culminates as abstraction in social media and networked culture. The new technol -
ogy that made mass communication possible was considered by some cultural critics, 
such as Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer, to push people towards passivity, to 
become regressive consumers.11 When such arguments were questioned, it eventually led 
to postmodern culture.12 “Cultural resistance,” as understood at the time of this writing, 
is therefore constantly fluctuating between these two notions of culture.
Culture and Postcoloniality
So far culture has been defined through a very specific lens, one that some critics would 
say leaves out a postcolonial reading. Therefore, another cultural critic must be consid -
ered to understand why, as imposing and limiting the views of Eagleton and Williams 
118
E. NA VASmight appear, they still do help to define the concept of culture during the first decade 
of the twenty-first century.
According to the Argentine philosopher, Enrique Dussel, modernity as currently rec -
ognized is the second of two modern periods. The first was a Hispanic Humanist 
Renaissance Modernity, which led to discovering the new world in 1492. He argues that 
in this modernity, the concept of the Other and the equation of center and periphery 
were defined to privilege Europe. Prior to this period, Europe was by no means the center 
of culture. The second modernity, which Dussel argues is the only one that is emphasized 
today, is the Modernity of Anglo-Germanic Europe, which begins with trade in 
Amsterdam during the sixteenth century. We can note that this is the same modernity 
that Eagleton and Williams acknowledge. Dussel explains that with the second moder -
nity came a need for simplification, because if this modernity was to become effective it 
had to invent itself as a world system. This simplification was attained with an equation 
that favored quantity over quality, and needed to leave out or at least downplay cultural, 
ethical, political, and even religious values; all quite important for people in Europe 
during the sixteenth century:
This simplification of complexity encompasses the totality of the life-world 
(Lebenswelt ), of the relationship with nature (a new technological and ecologi -
cal position that is no longer teleological), of subjectivity itself (a new self-
understanding of subjectivity), and of community (a new intersubjective and 
political relation). A new economic attitude (practico-productive) will now 
establish itself: the capitalism.13
Once this simplification with the rise of capital takes place, European modernity is able 
to spread across the world as it is currently experienced in terms of globalization. But 
there is a space within this framework that, Dussel argues, makes critical reflection pos -
sible. Capital’s need for simplification as a world system creates demand for subsystems 
that do not have standards for self-regulation. Some of these subsystems can be “redi -
rected at the service of humanity,” Dussel argues.14 This is what makes any critical analy -
sis possible. Therefore, postcolonial thinking and other methods of questioning the 
hegemony of European thinking can be considered subsystems within capital proper.
The definitions of culture outlined above are intimate with capitalism, and any criti -
cal questioning that takes place has been implemented from within. This is what hap -
pens in the rise of dub and the early stages of remix as understood in music culture; disco, 
hip hop, house, and all other forms of music that followed also function under the same 
paradigm. From this point of view there is no outside. And if there is no outside, then, 
perhaps enough subsystems could be developed at the service of humanity, or perhaps 
not. To evaluate this further, following Dussel’s argument, it becomes necessary to take 
a worldview, and understand that prior to Anglo-Germanic Modernity, Europe was at 
the periphery. Therefore a worldview could help understand the limitations of the cur -
rent stage of globalization as informed by capital. Dussel further argues that modernity 
as it has developed is reaching its limits and understanding what can be redeemed from 
the current global state is important in developing a “rational management of the world-
system.” In this system Dussel considers possible the control of domination and exclu -
sion that has made European modernity possible.15 How this is to take place is not made 
clear by Dussel, although he does outline three limitations of the simplification of 
European modernity which point to a shift that globalization itself is making possible. 
119
CULTURE AND REMIXHe cites Noam Chomsky’s “system of 500 years” to explain that the limitations include 
nature as a resource for life, which as capital develops is turned into a hazard with the 
development of antiecological technology; needless to say that at the moment this limi -
tation has to be desperately reevaluated. The second limit is humanity. Capital can only 
thrive through labor, and human labor has been reconfigured, made superfluous, as capi -
tal finds new ways to optimize itself as a world system. To achieve this, capital developed 
technology that pushes productivity to an unprecedented level. According to Dussel, 
with technological development the manual laborer has to live with low wages or unem -
ployment, thus exposing this second limitation with two extreme poles: global wealth 
and poverty. The third limitation is the inability of capital to effectively assimilate 
cultures that helped define it as a center. As these cultures develop a global position, 
they are doing so with an autonomy that does not fully embrace a European model. In 
sum, as global culture develops, it becomes harder for modernity, as has been defined by 
Europe, to stand. From this point of view, remix plays and will continue to play a major 
role in the development of global culture. Remix—while it can be used to promote 
modernity as a reductive model—can also be used to develop a worldview beyond 
Eurocentrism. What is also evident in this theoretical framework about culture and 
modernity is a worldview of culture that demands some form of resistance.
The Meaning of Culture
Based on the previous brief historical definition of culture, it is evident that when the 
term culture, alone, is mentioned, generally it is understood to imply some abstract form 
of resistance, or at least, something separate from that which is understood as popular—
this is more evident in Eagleton’s account. This understanding came to support the sepa -
ration of culture as high and low, as explained by Arato. Resistance against the popular 
(watered-down or kitsch) develops due to the fact that popular culture is primarily 
fueled by capital, whereas “high culture” (what the term culture alone implies) is 
invested in meaning and issues beyond making a profit. But the reality is that both of 
these cultures contribute to each other’s ongoing development, to the point that at times 
it is difficult to fully separate the high from the low. This became most evident during 
the postmodern period.
The conundrum that cultural producers constantly face when engaging this symbiotic 
relationship is that emerging cultural forms are assimilated with great ease, and this is 
passed on to remix as a creative binder, which thrives between and is shaped by the high 
as much as the low. In effect, remix culture is a culture of resistance—almost by default 
because the very act of taking preexisting, most likely copyright protected, material 
challenges the way creativity is defined by corporations. When viewed through a histori -
cal lens, this process, which if nothing else is certainly a disruption of intellectual prop -
erty laws, appears to be in the process of sublation, as previous forms and strategies of 
resistance have been assimilated in the past. One must ask then, can there be real 
changes (in terms of daily life and individual perspective on the world) to this ongoing 
process of sublation? A possible argument is that by understanding how such a process 
functions, cultural producers will be able to turn this apparent feedback loop into not 
only a stronger form of resistance, but also a force of ongoing critical reflection that has 
the potential to create new possibilities for culture’s creative drive. In order to develop 
a better sense of resistance’s potential role in such a process, then, it is worth examining 
how remix itself functions on a feedback loop, which takes place well within two 
120
E. NA VAScultural layers that define culture as understood by those who propose remix as a form 
of free expression, dissent, and a dematerialized totem for possibilities of a new world.
The Framework of Culture
Now that the term “culture” is defined, it is necessary to consider how it produces value, 
and how that value becomes prime and rich material for remixing. The framework of 
culture makes the act of remixing possible. This framework consists of two layers which 
function on a feedback loop.16 The first layer takes effect when something is introduced 
in culture; such an element will likely be different from what is commonly understood. 
Such an element often is actual research (field work, gathering of data that did not 
previously exist, the combination of ideas based on field work, lab research, cultural 
research, and/or gathered data, and day-to-day inquiry into the function of the world, 
etc.) that needs to be evaluated and therefore its sublation is not immediate. The second 
layer takes effect when that which is introduced attains cultural value and is appropri -
ated or sampled to be reintroduced in culture. The first layer privileges research and 
development. Creative practice in the arts, for the most part, functions on the second 
layer, which is why, more often than not, production consists of appropriation, or at least 
citation of material with predefined cultural value. The two layers have actually been in 
place since culture itself came about, but their relation has changed with the growing 
efficiency in production and communication methods due to the ever-growing speed of 
technological development. Before we evaluate the implication of this change in crea -
tivity and contemporary critical production, we must first understand the relation of the 
layers.
Some examples from the past include the photo camera, the phonograph, and more 
recently, the computer. All of these examples were not “original” but rather drastically 
different amalgamations of ideas, leading to specific technologies that, when first intro -
duced, people had to negotiate by process of sublation into their everyday lives.17 These 
are rather modern examples, which were only possible once the loop between the two 
layers was fast enough to provide feedback at a rate that would make research and develop -
ment an actual endeavor worthy of capital investment. But this was not always the case.
Before this period, the two layers were separated, or at least there was a great com -
munication lag between them ( Figure 8.1 ). When we think back to the days prior to the 
Enlightenment, we can see how the development of new forms and technologies took 
much longer to be produced than in our time. This was in part due to material limita -
tions in combination with social beliefs that perpetrated certain behaviors and attitudes 
towards the world.
Religion certainly played a major role in how the world was viewed. Prior to the 
Enlightenment, some people approached nature as a place in which to live, in part 
because nature was seen as a creation of God, or as though it embodied godly or spiritual 
powers. But as the Enlightenment took place, the belief that nature could be manipu -
lated for human needs took hold of Western culture.18 This premise enabled human 
beings to push for innovation, as we currently understand it. Once humans felt free to 
bend and shape all things, from nature to ideas, for particular ideological interests, we 
entered a new era. The speed of innovation became the driving force of what came to 
be known as modernism ( Figure 8.2 ). Arguably, a recent consequence of this attitude to 
bend nature to our desires is global warming, and the effects it produces, from hurricanes 
in the northern hemisphere to the disappearance of glaciers in Antarctica.
121
CULTURE AND REMIXAs modernism further developed, the efficiency of production led to a streamlined 
feedback loop, one which was sensed by cultural critics who came to be associated with 
the postmodern period ( Figure 8.3 ). In this case, the feedback loop is not only more 
efficient but begins to overlap, albeit with some delay. The questioning of terms such as 
originality, uniqueness, and the concept of progress itself, became common subjects for 
intellectual debates, and rich source material for mass media to thrive—which then 
becomes the subject of resistance by those invested in culture as defined above.
What all this means is that cultural layers have begun to share interests that push the 
established critical approaches of the modern and postmodern into a different Before Moder nism
Layer I
Material is intr oduced
Layer II
Material that is intr oduced, once it at tains cultural value,
is appr opriated and r eintroduced as commentar y,
criticism, or r emix.
Figure 8.1   The framework of culture before modernism (diagrams in this chapter 
courtesy of Eduardo Navas)
During Moder nism
Layer I
Material is intr oduced
Layer II
Material that is intr oduced, once it at tains cultural value,
is appr opriated and r eintroduced as commentar y,
criticism, or r emix.
Figure 8.2  The framework of culture during modernism
122
E. NA VASrelationship; one that we now need to reflect upon. In this case, the loop’s efficiency 
only grew as we entered the times of networked media, and currently the two layers 
function almost on top of each other ( Figure 8.4 ). The result is a steady relationship 
between the two layers that form the framework of culture, in terms of recycling the 
material, leading to an efficient production that is completely dependent on constant 
communication. This last tendency is best understood in popular terms with the concept 
of constant updating . Just as T witter remains relevant because people keep tweeting, the 
two layers have now reached a frenetic level that repositions them in a state of never-
ending production; evaluation of that production is immediately relayed back to the 
producer, and so forth. We can think of our current moment as the dream party of the During P ostmoder nism
Layer I
Material is intr oduced.
Layer II
Material that is intr oduced, once it at tains cultural value,
is appr opriated and r eintroduced as commentar y,
criticism, or r emix.A steady relationship bet ween the two layers develops. This
is the moment when the recycling of mater ial becomes
evident to those who ana lyze cultur e.
Figure 8.3  The framework of culture during postmodernism
During the Time of Net works
Layer I
Material is intr oduced.
Layer II
Material that is intr oduced, once it at tains cultural value,
is appr opriated and r eintroduced as commentar y,
criticism, or r emix.A steady relationship bet ween the two layers develops. This
is the moment when the recycling of mater ial becomes
evident to those who ana lyze cultur e.
Figure 8.4  The framework of culture during the time of networks (general stage)
123
CULTURE AND REMIXhouse DJ, whose ultimate high is to keep the perfect beat going for hours, with an obses -
sion to make the entire mix of multiple songs sound like one single composition in 
which the dancers can push themselves physically with no other goal than to feel the 
beat. The perfect loop of beat-blending, then, serves as a decent metaphor for the type 
of obsession behind the two layers of the framework of culture. The beat-blending even -
tually turns into a mashup, in which both layers can be acknowledged, much as how in 
a music mashup two songs are recognized for their respective sound, while also coming 
together to create a new unique sound. This very tension makes the music mashup a 
compelling composition, which listeners engage with while understanding the metames -
sage: the source material has a new role in the service of sounding like one composition. 
The two layers of the framework of culture function in a similar way once we reach the 
level of efficiency at play in the beginning of the twenty-first century, due to the ongoing 
development of computing.
Music, art, and literature function within the overlapping areas of the two layers of 
the framework of culture, with great dependence on material that is constantly recycled. 
They consist of appropriating something of cultural value in order to create meaning. 
This need has long been associated with intertextuality, which in the literary tradition 
is understood as the act of embedding a text within another text, a conceptual remix of 
sorts where ideas are cited, but not necessarily the material object or concrete instantia -
tion (which is what the act of remixing achieves in the actual sampling of content). An 
intertextual work is, in essence, a literary mashup (a direct juxtaposition) of 
concepts.19
Intertextuality plays a pivotal role in critical production. It does so by recycling infor -
mation between the two layers of the framework. However, for criticality this process 
functions at a metalevel, in which the material recycled is a source with cultural value, 
which can be used for both economic interests as well as critical reflection. Such mate -
rial recycles on metaloops well within the established overlapping of the two layers of 
the framework of culture ( Figure 8.5 ). These feedback metaloops give way to specializa -
tions based on established traditions that have their own metalanguage (specialized 
During the Time of Net works
Layer I
Material is intr oduced.
Layer II
Material that is intr oduced,
once it at tains cultural value,
is appr opriated and r eintroduced
as commentar y, criticism, or r emix.A steady relationship
between the two layers
develops . This is the
moment when the
recycling of mater ial
becomes evident to
those who anal yze cultu re.meta
metametaloop/s
Figure 8.5  The framework of culture during the time of networks (meta stage)
124
E. NA VASmethods and terms that support it as an institution). An example of this type of metapro -
duction searching for a critical position, that of resistance as defined in relation to cul -
ture, is the tradition of the avant-garde in the fine arts. The following sections shows 
how the framework of culture informs the very concept of the avant-garde, particularly 
the historical avant-garde and the neo-avant-garde. Both, as will become evident, devel -
oped out of cultural resistance, but they were eventually sublated by capital and pre -
sented in watered-down form to the mainstream.
Remixing the Avant-Garde
The avant-garde, according to Peter Bürger, can be separated into two major periods: the 
historical avant-garde and the neo-avant-garde. Bürger, in Theory of the Avant-Garde , 
argues that the historical avant-garde was active during the early part of the twentieth 
century. In this period he includes the Dadaists, the Futurists, as well as the Constructivists. 
These groups were historical because they were the first that overtly resisted art as an 
institution supported by the bourgeoisie, which, paradoxically, legitimized their practice; 
they not only searched for a “break with the traditional representational system but [also] 
the total abolition of the institution of art.”20 It was not the historical avant-garde but the 
neo-avant-garde, which was active after World War II, that attained full autonomy, but 
only through the negation of the historical avant-garde.21 This negation was already at 
play in the historical avant-garde itself, and can be found in the works of Marcel Duchamp, 
whose signed urinal ( Fountain ) questioned art and negated individual production. This 
strategy was eventually incorporated as a vital element in art practice—and becomes 
expected in art production after Duchamp.22 The avant-garde’s negation is vital in the 
work of the neo-avant-garde, Bürger argues, because it solidified the autonomy that art 
attained thanks to bourgeois society; an autonomy that separated art from the rest of the 
world, due to its specialized role as the tool for the bourgeois to exercise self-reflection 
“that both reveals and obscures an actual historical development.”23
The historical avant-garde was introduced in the first layer of the framework of culture; 
once it was absorbed and attained cultural value it became remixed and reintroduced as the 
neo-avant-garde. But once both terms became familiar, they began to function (as they do 
to this day) in terms of meta, meaning that both the historical and neo-avant-garde are fully 
assimilated and legitimated based on cultural value, which contributes to and depends upon 
Art as an institution. The very concept of the avant-garde, whether historical or neo, at the 
time of this writing, is no longer an act of resistance in itself—but, through the process of its 
institutionalization, has become an important account of resistance in history, which informs 
new forms of critical production. Arguably, if any artists were to call themselves avant-  
gardists, it may sound somewhat romantic and even naïve because the term itself has lost its 
vernacular power; it now functions primarily as an institutional statement that fully legiti -
mizes Art as both a culture and a market. This is the paradox of cultural production: as it 
becomes acknowledged, it also dies out, and becomes safe to discuss.
The historical and neo-avant-garde, then, function on a metalevel, in which already 
introduced material is yet again remixed and goes through various reintroductions and 
evaluations by art historians and theorists as well as artists, themselves, from the second 
half of the twentieth century.
Benjamin Buchloh and Hal Foster are particularly interested in the neo-avant-garde, 
and throughout the 1980s and 1990s revisited Bürger’s propositions. Foster, like Bürger, 
considers the neo-avant-garde to start with postwar culture:
125
CULTURE AND REMIXIn postwar art to pose the question of repetition is to pose the question of the 
neo-avant-garde, a loose grouping of North American and Western European 
artists of the 1950s and 1960s who reprised such avant-garde devices of the 
1910s and 1920s as collage and assemblage, the readymade and the grid, mono -
chrome painting and constructed sculpture.24
Foster goes on to analyze works after the war as repetitions, that at times appear as 
“ciphers of alienation and reification”25 which directly quoted the strategies originally 
tested by the historical avant-garde with almost no originality, complemented by an 
oedipal drive.
Benjamin Buchloh, on the other hand, considers the neo-avant-garde to start not 
immediately after World War II but around the 1960s. He sees conceptual art as the first 
true neo-avant-garde movement. According to Buchloh, art produced between 1968 
and the mid-1970s is the first to break away from the paradigm of the historical avant-
garde. For him, the neo-avant-garde does not mimic, or merely repeat strategies that 
were originally introduced by the historical avant-garde. This is the case with the work 
of Michael Asher and Daniel Buren, Marcel Broodthaers and Hans Haacke, to name a 
few from his list of artists who developed the strategies of “institutional critique.”26 
Regardless of chronological differences, Buchloh, similarly to Foster, openly claims that 
Bürger places the neo-avant-garde in oedipal fashion in relation to the historical 
avant-garde.
In the cases of both Buchloh and Foster, the concepts of the historical avant-garde and 
neo-avant-garde are reevaluated as part of history. This means that the terms enjoy cul -
tural value. The historical and neo-avant-garde, then, are functioning at a metalevel, at 
play well within established discourse, given that both concepts became contextualized 
with a specific theory by Bürger; by the time Buchloh and Foster discuss the meaning of 
the avant-garde, they are doing so as a type of update, which can still be critical and a real 
contribution to art as an institution, but this is not being done at the edges of the two lay -
ers, but well within established paradigms—in other words, material is being remixed in 
terms of discourse in order to develop a deeper understanding of history. The metaloop, 
functioning well within the established space of the two layers, does not really allow for 
much more. Understanding this issue leads people who are critical of scholarly research, 
but not necessarily reflective of this ongoing process, to call such work an “academic exer -
cise” if the same subject is revisited more or less along the lines of those scholars who are 
known as experts in the field. This is actually necessary as a process of learning; one which 
is to be left behind once the knowledge is mastered. However, in part, it is when such 
repetition is not left behind, but used for career development and not the pursuit of knowl -
edge, that scholarly research develops a stigma for being “academic.”
This is a brief reflection on why much of historical criticism, and any critical analysis, 
becomes sublated once it begins to circulate between the two layers of the framework of 
culture, not pushing on the edges of either layer, but rather well within areas that are 
preestablished and are likely to produce material that appears innovative; but in the end 
is experimenting with source material that is already quite familiar to many people, 
which is why it has cultural value in the first place. To be clear, there is real value in this 
recycling, because it offers a space in which people can reevaluate their histories and 
contributions to the world.
This recycling has no definite end. In effect, the concept of the avant-garde has been 
revisited many times over and has found its way into new media practice in the writings 
126
E. NA VASof a few theorists. Julian Stallabrass, for instance, in his book Internet Art: The Online 
Clash of Culture and Commerce , written in 2003, presents net art as a clear manifestation 
of the avant-garde. Stallabrass sees net art as a new cultural field that offers real acts of 
resistance.27 He contextualizes various works in the tradition of the avant-garde, includ -
ing the works of the net.art group, that actually claimed an avant-garde position, during 
the early days of the Internet. Stallabrass notes:
Many of the actual conditions of avant-gardism are present in online art: its 
anti-art character, its continual probing of the borders of art, and of art’s separa -
tion from the rest of life, its challenge to the art institutions, genuine group 
activity, manifestos and collective programmes, and most of all an idea of for -
ward movement (as opposed to one novelty merely succeeding another).28
Stallabrass follows this quote by directly citing Bürger’s theory of the avant-garde in 
relation to net art practice, explaining that the models of the historical avant-garde that 
Bürger defined are at play once again in net art. Unlike Foster or Bürger, who take on a 
more or less detached position towards the avant-garde in general, Stallabrass sounds 
almost celebratory of Internet art throughout his book, as though net artists will achieve 
what previous avant-garde groups were unable to accomplish: to bring art back into 
culture at large; a struggle that is of interest to many of the historians who have contem -
plated the avant-garde.29
Stallabrass is also functioning at a metalevel similar to Buchloh and Foster; like them, 
he is recycling material that is already part of culture; which, as more and more histori -
ans and cultural critics write about the historical and neo-avant-garde, increases in 
cultural value to the point that it eventually supports the very institution both terms 
question and critique.
The Remix in Remix Culture
How and why the avant-garde is legitimated by a metaloop should be kept in mind in 
order to understand how this type of recycling also takes place in other areas of cultural 
production.
Lawrence Lessig, in his various books on remix culture written throughout the first 
decade of the twenty-first century, argues that during the first stages of the Internet, 
culture entered an unprecedented level of global creativity that, at the time, appeared 
to be open for a few years before it would be sublated by corporations who, according to 
Lessig would try to control it as they did television and radio.30 Lessig made his most 
concise case for a read/write culture (his term) in his last book, Remix: Making Art and 
Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy , based on this premise of control by corpora -
tions.31 At the end of a presentation he gave at the 23C3’s 2006 conference, one of his 
colleagues argued that all Lessig and his allies had to do was wait for the “all these guys 
my age and older” (as he called them) to die in about 20 years, and Lessig responded 
with excitement that at the time we did not have 20 years, that if we waited that long 
then the new culture produced with digital technology would effectively be absorbed 
into the preexisting media models.32 Lessig argued that, at the time, we had about five 
years before the possibilities to produce remixes were controlled by corporations.
In this point, Lessig, himself may not be completely correct, for a reason that he him -
self cited in his book The Future of Ideas33 and further expanded upon in his last book on 
127
CULTURE AND REMIXremix published in 2008.34 He explains that the exchange of ideas does not impoverish 
those who have ideas, but rather that ideas thrive when they are contemplated by oth -
ers.35 A friction implicit in this exchange is that once an idea is shared, it cannot be 
taken back (at least not yet, although sci-fi movies have been made about erasing and 
implanting memories).36 In this sense the idea of being able to use networked commu -
nication creatively as we have been doing for over ten years is unlikely to go away. 
People will not allow this to happen to them, because they are not about to give up a 
habit that is part of their daily reality—but this does not mean that people are critical 
about the situation; as Clement Greenberg once observed about the avant-garde’s posi -
tion in relation to kitsch culture (“watered-down” culture) and totalitarianism:
Kitsch keeps a dictator in closer contact with the “soul” of the people. Should 
the official culture be one superior to the general mass level, there would be 
danger of isolation.
Nevertheless, if the masses were conceivably to ask for avant-garde art and 
literature, Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin would not hesitate long in attempting to 
satisfy such demand.37
As things have played out since Lessig expressed his concerns, it may not be necessary 
to take away the means to remix from people. Why culture will not go back to previous 
forms of communication that were at play before the Internet is because at the moment, 
the exchange and incessant appropriation of ideas have become part of the global econ -
omy itself. If anything, the ability of the consumer to speak up with great efficiency has 
recently become a ubiquitous tool for corporations’ “quality assurance.” The main reason 
why capital is able to thrive no matter what comes its way is because it is able to sublate 
expediently just about anything with the potential to generate profit.38 In this sense, 
Lessig’s argument that we have entered a hybrid economy is moot, because capital has 
always been a hybrid economy since its foundation: it is designed to absorb everything 
possible; in effect capital is merely assimilating the latest developments in culture at 
large to keep thriving. Capital is able to redefine itself into new models in order to meet 
the bottom line and create revenue. It is ruthless in achieving this. Understanding this 
foundational element of capital is pivotal to having a consistent critical stance as a 
cultural producer and to be capable of making real changes from within, as Dussel argues 
in his position in terms of postcoloniality.
Lessig’s concern has been well exposed by Douglas Rushkoff in his Frontline docu -
mentaries The Merchants of Cool  (2001) as well as The Persuaders (2005). Both docu -
mentaries show that during the first decade of the twenty-first century, corporations 
were always asking for feedback from the consumers.39 While this might sound like a 
great thing, Rushkoff shows that corporations, like Viacom, owners of MTV , are not 
interested in understanding people’s concerns. What they want, Rushkoff argues, is to 
understand what consumers desire in order to give it to them in the products that 
Viacom and similar corporations produce. The metaloop within the two layers of the 
framework of culture, previously discussed in relation to the avant-garde, is at play here, 
but in this case it is not developing a critical reflection; rather it produces a scheme for 
mass consumerism. Material is recycled primarily not because it is of cultural value 
(although it may well be), but because it is lucrative.
Both documentaries make evident that consumers are expected to share with corpora -
tions what they want via ever-growing forms of feedback. This was actually an early 
128
E. NA VASstage of a very efficient economic model which Rushkoff reports on in his latest broad -
cast documentary Generation Like (2014).40 This documentary makes evident how social 
media expands the previous economic periods.
Generation Like  focuses on Facebook to expose a new type of economy that drives 
online activity, and turns it into actual revenue for major corporations. Even Google’s 
search engine thrives on this tendency when it records user search queries, and encour -
ages its members to also become part of Google +, its own popular social media platform. 
The retrieval and analysis of information from these and other online spaces is known 
as data mining.
The metaloop within the two cultural layers of the framework of culture function, in 
this case, to produce ideology as the process of sublation leading to the dismissal of the 
previous form of resistance: to be cool was a form of rebelling by young individuals who 
may not have had critical conscience, or at least reflected self-consciously about what 
they consumed. Today, kids, tweens, and especially teenagers and young adults do not 
even know what it means “to sell out” as Rushkoff makes evident in Generation Like  
when he asks teenagers and young adults what the phrase means, and they answer play -
fully admitting that they do not know. We are clearly living in an environment in which 
consumers are expected to contribute material in order to consume. This is different 
from a not so distant period when consumers were expected to be skeptical of what was 
pitched to them, because they were aware of being manipulated. In The Merchants of 
Cool, Rushkoff shows a focus group of teenagers who express their dismissal of the soft 
drink Sprite, which around 2001 used sports stars to tell consumers not to drink the very 
soft drink the stars were advertising. The argument by Sprite, at the time, was that by 
doing so, the corporation was trying to deconstruct the problem of reaching their target 
customers (teenagers). This leads to a naturalized state of opining, which is now pivotal 
to the economy of social media. The twenty-first century user knows that she has the 
right to speak. However, it is not encouraged for this speaking to be critical, but merely 
to be expressed so that it can be data-mined for the sake of figuring out what to sell back 
to the people.
The Feedback Loop and the Future of Culture
The above analysis surveys how elements of resistance are made possible, questioned and 
eventually sublated via a feedback loop between the first two layers that form the frame -
work of culture. Within this feedback loop are metaloops that allow for cultural and 
capital value to thrive. Some examples of how these loops function include the histori -
cization of the avant-garde, as well as the development of social media as a new type of 
economy. These metaloops are so efficient that remixing material, as is commonly 
known in terms of material sampling, has reached a moment in which we produce 
almost as fast as we speak. As a result, we are self-aware of how we recycle ideas, informa -
tion, and material production. The very act of making this observation shows that it is 
in the materialization of the immaterial—that is, in the careful measurement of the flow 
of ideas as they are embedded in different forms where there is potential for remix as a 
form of criticism and creative production to thrive while functioning well within the 
two layers of the framework of culture. Once individuals invested in cultural production 
remain critically conscious of this ongoing process of sublation and recycling of material 
and immaterial elements and objects, and how resistance itself thrives within the loops, 
it becomes possible to develop a critical position well within the very system being 
129
CULTURE AND REMIXcritiqued and challenged. Just as capitalists are well aware of the metaloops within the 
two layers of the framework of culture, and make the most of them for profit, cultural 
producers must become self-reflectively aggressive in using and appropriating the very 
same metaloops for the realization of a future that is rich in cultural production.
Notes
 1 An analysis of ngrams of the terms “remix” and “remix culture” gaining major use during the mid to late 
1990s can be found in Eduardo Navas, “Remix[ing] Sampling,” Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  
(Vienna: Springer, 2012), 26–27.
 2 This concept was first introduced in my book Remix Theory , and has been expanded in various short 
articles since. For one of the most in-depth analyses on the framework of culture see, Eduardo Navas, 
“The New Aesthetic and The Framework of Culture,” Media-N Journal  8, no. 2 (Fall 2012), http://
median.newmediacaucus.org/blog/current-issue-fall-2012-v-08-n-02-december-2nd-2012/the-new-aes -
thetic-and-the-framework-of-culture/ (accessed May 10, 2014).
 3 Terry Eagleton, “Versions of Culture” and “Culture in Crisis,” The Idea of Culture  (Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2000), 1–50.
 4 Ibid., 1.
 5 Raymond Williams, Culture and Society 1780–1950  (New York: Harper, 1958), 296.
 6 Ibid., 297.
 7 Roland Barthes, “Necessity and Limits of Mythology,” Mythologies  (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972), 
156–159.
 8 Eagleton, “Versions of Culture,” The Idea of Culture , 24–25.
 9 Andrew Arato, “Esthetic Theory and Cultural Criticism,” The Essential Frankfurt School Reader  
(New York: Urizen, 1978), 185.
10 Ibid.
11 Theodor Adorno, The Culture Industry , ed. J. M. Bernstein (New York: Routledge, 1991), 61–97.
12 Many books have been written about postmodernism. One of the most influential, arguably, is Fredric 
Jameson, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism  (Durham, NC: Duke University, 1991).
13 Enrique Dussel, “Beyond Eurocentrism,” The Cultures of Globalization , ed. Fredric Jameson (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 1998), 13.
14 Ibid, 17.
15 Ibid, 19.
16 This section of the text is an expanded analysis originally published as part of the essay, Eduardo Navas “The 
Framework of Culture: Remix in Music, Art, and Literature,” Remix Theory , http://remixtheory.net/?p=651.
17 This idea is summarized by Kirby Ferguson in his short film series, “Everything Is a Remix,” http://www.
everythingisaremix.info/watch-the-series/.
18 This is something that is commonly understood in the history of science. For a very basic book see Peter 
Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500–1700  (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2001).
19 See Eduardo Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture,” Remix Theory , http://
remixtheory.net/?p=444.
20 Peter Bürger “Avant-Gardist Work of Art,” Theory of the Avant-Garde , trans. Michael Shaw (Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), 63.
21 Ibid., 59.
22 Ibid., 51–53.
23 Ibid., 36.
24 Hal Foster, The Return of the Real  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 160.
25 Ibid.
26 Benjamin Buchloh, Neo-Avantgarde and Culture Industry  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), xxiv.
27 Julian Stallabrass, Internet Art: The Online Clash of Culture and Commerce  (London: Tate Publishing, 
2003), 8–9.
28 Ibid., 35.
29 This is certainly the case for Buchloh and Foster. This contention is well exposed in Bürger’s thesis; see, 
“Avant-Garde and Engagement” in Theory of the Avante-Garde , 83–94, and “Postscript to the German 
Edition,” ibid., 95–99.
130
E. NA VAS30 See Lawrence Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace  (New York: Penguin, 1999). Lawrence Lessig, 
Free Culture  (New York: Penguin, 2004). Lawrence Lessig,  The Future of Ideas and Code 2.0  (New York: 
Vintage, 2001).
31 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy (New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008).
32 Lawrence Lessig “Lawrence Lessig—On Free, and the Differences between Culture and Code (23c3),” 
presentation at the 23C3, Berlin, December, 2006, particularly at 1:08 and 14:26, https://archive.org/
details/LawrenceLessig-OnFreeAndTheDifferencesBetweenCultureAndCode23c3 (accessed July 2014).
33 Lessig, The Future of Ideas , 8–11.
34 Lessig, Remix , 28–33.
35 Lessig, The Future of Ideas , 22–23.
36 Movies like Total Recall , TriStar Pictures, 1990, and Paycheck , Paramount Pictures, 2003, focus on manip -
ulation of memory, something which is quite possible in the future with the development of cybernetics 
and nanotechnology.
37 Clement Greenberg, “Avant-Garde and Kitsch,” Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays and Criticism, 
Volume 1 (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 1988), 20.
38 Terry Eagleton, After Theory  (New York: Basic Books, 2003), 1–22.
39 Douglas Rushkoff, “The Merchants of Cool,” Frontline , 2001, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/
shows/cool. Also, “The Persuaders,” Frontline , 2005, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/.
40 Douglas Rushkoff, “Generation Like,” Frontline , 2014, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/  
generation-like/.
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor. The Culture Industry , edited by J. M. Bernstein. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Arato, Andrew. “Esthetic Theory and Cultural Criticism.” In The Essential Frankfurt School Reader , 
edited by Andrew Arato and Eike Gebhardt. New York: Urizen, 1978.
Barthes, Roland. Mythologies . New York: Hill and Wang, 1972.
Buchloh, Benjamin H. D. Neo-Avantgarde and Culture Industry: Essays on European and American Art 
from 1955 to 1975 . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Bürger, Peter. Theory of the Avant-Garde . Translated by Michael Shaw. Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1984.
Dear, Peter. Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500–1700 . Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Dussel, Enrique. “Beyond Eurocentrism,” The Cultures of Globalization , edited by Fredric Jameson, 3–32. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998.
Eagleton, Terry. After Theory . New York: Basic Books, 2003.
——. The Idea of Culture . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2000.
Ferguson, Kirby. “Everything is a Remix.” http://www.everythingisaremix.info/watch-the-series/ 
(accessed May 10, 2014).
Foster, Hal. The Return of the Real . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Greenberg, Clement. Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays and Criticism Volume 1 . Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Jameson, Fredric. The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham, NC: Duke University, 1991.
Lessig, Lawrence. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace . New York: Penguin, 1999.
——. The Future of Ideas and Code 2.0 . New York: Vintage, 2001.
——. Free Culture . New York: Penguin, 2004.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin Press, 2008.
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . Vienna: Springer, 2012.
——. “The New Aesthetic and The Framework of Culture,” Media-N Journal  8, no. 2 (Fall 2012): 
http://median.newmediacaucus.org/blog/current-issue-fall-2012-v-08-n-02-december-2nd-2012/
the-new-aesthetic-and-the-framework-of-culture/ (accessed May 10, 2014).
131
CULTURE AND REMIX——. “The Framework of Culture: Remix in Music, Art, and Literature.” Remix Theory . http://
remixtheory.net/?p =651 (accessed, May 10, 2014).
——. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” Remix Theory . http://remixtheory.
net/?p=444 (accessed May 3, 2014).
Rushkoff, Douglas. “The Merchants of Cool,” Frontline , 2001. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/
shows/cool (accessed May 10, 2014).
——. “The Persuaders,” Frontline , 2005. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/persuaders 
(accessed May 10, 2014).
——. “Generation Like,” Frontline , 2014. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/generation-like/ 
(accessed May 10, 2014).
Stallabrass, Julian. Internet Art: The Online Clash of Culture and Commerce . London: Tate Publishing, 
2003.
Williams, Raymond. Culture and Society 1780–1950 . New York: Harper, 1958.
This page intentionally left blank
Part II
AESTHETICS
This page intentionally left blank
9
REMIX STRATEGIES IN 
SOCIAL MEDIA
Lev Manovich
It is always more challenging to think theoreti -
cally about the present than the past. But this 
challenge is what also makes it very exciting. 
While each major release of Photoshop, Flash, 
Maya, Flame, and other commonly used applica -
tions continues to introduce dozens of new fea -
tures and improvements of professional media 
authoring software that were largely shaped in the 
1990s, these are incremental improvements 
rather than new paradigms.
The new paradigms that emerge in the 2000s 
are not about new types of media software per se. 
Instead, they are about the exponential expan -
sion of the number media producers—and the 
new function of the Web as a universal platform for non-professional media circula -
tion. “Social software,” “social media,” “user-generated content,” “Web 2.0,” and 
“read/write Web” are some of the terms coined in this decade to capture these 
developments.
If visual communication professionals have adopted software-based tools and  
workflows throughout the 1990s, in the next decade “media consumers” gradually  
transformed into “media producers.” The decline in prices and increase in the media 
capabilities of consumer electronics combined with the ubiquity of Internet access and 
with the emergence of new social media platforms have created a new media ecology 
and dynamic relationship between the media producer and consumer. In retrospect, if 
1995 can be designated as the year of the professional media revolution (for example, 
the release of version 3 of After Effects this year included the ability to import 
Illustrator and Photoshop layers—enabling authors of motion graphics greater ease 
and flexibility in their workflows), I would center the consumer media revolution in 
2005. During this year, photo and video blogging exploded; the term “user-generated 
content” (UGC) entered the mainstream; YouTube launched; and both Flickr and The author of this chapter re -
fers to some online content that 
is no longer available or has 
been expired in newer software 
versions. However, the points 
made offer a historical perspec -
tive of remix studies that com -
municate effectively beyond the 
boundaries of software versions 
or dead links.
136
L. MANOVICHMySpace were acquired by larger companies 
(Yahoo and Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation, 
respectively).
If the professional media revolution of the 1990s 
can be identified with a small set of software 
applications, the cultural software which enables 
new media ecology emerging in the middle of 2000s is much more diverse and hetero -
geneous. Media and communication software running on cellphones, tablets, and other 
consumer electronics devices, media sharing sites (Instagram, YouTube), social network -
ing sites (Facebook), Web applications such as Google Docs, APIs of major Web 2.0 
companies, blog publishing software (Blogger), microcontent platforms (T witter), vir -
tual globes (Google Earth, Microsoft Virtual Earth), consumer-level media editing and 
cataloging software (iPhoto) and, last but not least, search engines are just some of the 
categories impacting consumers and producers of digital culture. Add to these other 
software categories which are not directly visible to consumers but which are responsible 
for the networked-based media universe of sharing, remixing, collaboration, blogging, 
reblogging, and so on—everything from Web services and client-server architecture to 
Ajax and social media management dashboards—and the task of tracking cultural soft -
ware today appears to be daunting. But it is not impossible.
This chapter considers different dimensions of the new paradigm of UGC and media 
sharing that emerged in the 2000s. My focus is on the relationships between the affor -
dances provided by software interfaces and tools, the aesthetics and structure of media 
objects created with these tools, and the theoretical impact of software use on the very 
concept of media. In other words: what is “media” after software (for social networking 
and media sharing)? One key development is the integration of media production  
with its consumption: instead of dealing with separate media design applications, we 
now have to consider social media platforms such as Facebook and T witter that  
integrate the functions of creating media, publishing it, remixing other people’s media, 
discussing it, keeping up with friends and interest groups, meeting new people, and  
so on.
I look at the circulation, editing, and experience of media as components of com -
munication structured by Web interfaces. Given that the term remix  has already 
been widely used in discussing social media, I will use it as a starting point. I follow 
a strategy that helps reveal the parallels and highlight the differences between 
“remix culture” in general and software-enabled remix operations in particular. (If 
we don’t do this and simply refer to everything today as “remix,” we are not really 
trying to explain things anymore—we are just labeling them.) I discuss interfaces of 
different Web services to show how they create distinct user experiences, and how 
seemingly small differences can affect whether a media environment is perceived as 
a remix. I also investigate an essential condition for the emergence of remix culture 
from the early 1970s onward—the technological modularity  of media—in order to 
explain new types of modularity and, correspondingly, new types of remix operations 
enabled by software. Finally, this chapter also analyzes another crucial dimension of 
the social media universe: mobility . (Mobility here refers not to the spatial move -
ment of individuals and groups or the ability to access the Web on mobile devices, 
but to something else : the new speed and scale of the circulation of media objects between 
people, devices, and the Web .)See Chapter 32  for Jonah Brucker- 
Cohen’s discussion of the aes  the-
tics of remix projects.
137
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIARemix, Montage, Collage: What’s Next?
“Remixing” originally had a precise and narrow meaning limited to music. Although 
precedents of remixing can be found earlier, it was the introduction of multitrack mixers 
in 1950s that over next few decades made remixing music a standard practice. With 
each element of a song—vocals, drums, etc.—available for separate manipulation, it 
became possible to “re-mix” the song: change the volume of some tracks or substitute 
new tracks for the old ones. Gradually the term became more and more broad, today 
referring to any reworking of already existing cultural work(s).
In his book DJ Culture  Ulf Poschardt singles out different stages in the evolution of 
remixing practice. In 1972 DJ Tom Moulton made his first disco remixes; as Poschardt 
points out, they
show a very chaste treatment of the original song. Moulton sought above all a 
different weighting of the various soundtracks, and worked the rhythmic ele -
ments of the disco songs even more clearly and powerfully  . . . Moulton used the 
various elements of the sixteen or twenty-four track master tapes and remixed 
them.1
By 1987, “DJs started to ask other DJs for remixes” and the treatment of the original 
material became much more aggressive. For example,
Coldcut used the vocals from Ofra Hanza’s “Im Nin Alu” and contrasted 
Rakim’s ultra-deep bass voice with her provocatively feminine voice. To this 
were added techno sounds and a house-inspired remix of a rhythm section that 
loosened the heavy, sliding beat of the rap piece, making it sound lighter and 
brighter.2
The terms “montage” and “collage” come to us from literary and visual modernism of 
the early twentieth century—think of works by Pablo Picasso, László Moholy-Nagy, 
Sergey Eisenstein, Hannah Höch, or Raoul Hausmann. They do not always adequately 
describe contemporary electronic music. Let me note just three differences. First, musi -
cal samples are often arranged in loops. Second, the nature of sound allows musicians to 
mix preexisting sounds in a variety of ways, from clearly differentiating and contrasting 
individual samples (thus following the traditional modernist aesthetics of montage/col -
lage), to mixing them into an organic and coherent whole. To borrow the terms from 
Roland Barthes we can say that if modernist collage always involved a “clash” of ele -
ment, electronic and software collage also allows for “blend.”3 Third, the electronic 
musicians now often conceive their works beforehand as something that will be remixed, 
sampled, taken apart and modified. In other words, rather than sampling from mass 
media to create a unique and final artistic work (as in modernism), contemporary musi -
cians use their own works and works by other artists in further remixes.
The revolution in electronic pop music that took place in the second part of the 1980s 
was paralleled by similar developments in pop visual culture. The introduction of elec -
tronic editing and image-creating equipment such as Switcher, Keyer, Paintbox, and 
Image Store made remixing and sampling a common practice in video production toward 
the end of the decade. First pioneered in music videos, it eventually later took over the 
138
L. MANOVICHwhole visual culture of TV . Other software tools such as Photoshop (1989) and After 
Effects (1993) had the same effect on the fields of graphic design, motion graphics, com -
mercial illustration, and photography. And, a few years later, the World Wide Web rede -
fined an electronic document as a mix of other documents. Remix culture has arrived.
The question that at this point is really hard to answer is what comes after remix? Will 
we get eventually tired of cultural objects—be they dresses by Alexander McQueen, 
motion graphics by MK12 or songs by Aphex T win—made from samples of preexisting 
databases of culture? And if we do, will it be still psychologically possible to create a new 
aesthetics that does not rely on excessive sampling? When I was emigrating from Russia 
to the US in 1981, moving from gray and red Communist Moscow to a vibrant and 
postmodern New York, I felt that the Communist regime would last for at least another 
300 years. But within just ten years the Soviet Union ceased to exist. Similarly, in the 
middle of the 1990s the euphoria unleashed by the Web, the collapse of Communist 
governments in Eastern Europe and early effects of globalization created an impression 
that we have left Cold War culture behind—its heavily armed borders, massive spying, 
and the military-industrial complex. And once again, only ten years later it appeared 
that we are back in the darkest days of the Cold War—except that now we are being 
tracked with RFID chips, computer vision surveillance systems, data mining, and other 
new technologies of the twenty-first century. So it is very possible that remix culture, 
which right now appears to be so firmly in place that it can’t be challenged by any other 
cultural logic, will morph into something else sooner than we think.
I don’t know what comes after remix. But if we now try now to develop a better his -
torical and theoretical understanding of the remix era and the technological platforms 
that enable it, we will be in a better position to recognize and understand the new era 
that will inevitably replace it.
The Remix of Things
Given the trends toward ubiquitous computing and “Internet of things,” it is inevitable 
that the remixing paradigm will make its way into physical space as well. Bruce Sterling’s 
brilliant book Shaping Things  describes a possible future scenario where objects publish 
detailed information about their history, use, and impact on the environment, and ordi -
nary consumers track this information.4 I imagine a future RSS reader may give you a 
choice of billions of objects to track.
For a different take on how a physical space—in this case, a city—can reinvent itself 
via remix, consider coverage of Buenos Aires by The, the journal by “trend and future 
consultancy” The Future Laboratory.5 They  enthusiastically describe the city in remix 
terms—and while the desire to project a fashionable term on everything in sight is obvi -
ous, the result is actually mostly convincing. The copy reads as follows: “Buenos Aires 
has gone mashup. The porteños  are adopting their traditions with some American sauce 
and European pepper.” A local DJ, Villa Diamante, released an album that “mixes elec -
tronic music with cumcia , South American peasant music.” A clothing brand, 12-na, 
“mixes flea-market finds with modern materials. And nonprofit publication project 
Eloisa Cartonea  “combines covers painted by kids who collect the city’s cardboard with 
the work of emerging writers and poets.”
Remix practices extend beyond particular technologies and areas of culture. WIRED  
magazine devoted its July 2005 issue to the theme “Remix Planet.” The introduction 
boldly stated: “From Kill Bill  to Gorillaz, from custom Nikes to Pimp My Ride , this is the 
139
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAage of the remix.”6 Another top IT trend watcher in the world—the annual O’Reilly 
Emerging Technology conferences (ETECH) similarly adopted “Remix” as the theme for 
its 2005 conference. Attending the conference, I watched in amazement how top execu -
tives from Microsoft, Yahoo, Amazon, and other leading IT companies not precisely 
known for their avant-garde aspirations described their recent technologies and research 
projects using the concept of remix. If I had any doubts that we are living not simply in 
Remix Culture but in a Remix Era; they disappeared right at that conference.
Communication in a “Cloud”
During 2000s remix gradually moved from being one of the options to being treated as 
practically a new cultural default. The twentieth century paradigm in which a small 
number of professional producers sent messages over communication channels that they 
controlled to a much larger number of users was replaced by a new paradigm.7 In this 
model, a much large number of producers publish content into “a global media cloud”; the users 
create personalized mixes by choosing from this cloud .8 A significant percentage of these 
producers and users overlap, i.e., they are the same people. Furthermore, a user can also 
select when and where to view her news—a phenomenon that has come to be known 
as “timeshifting” and “placeshifting.” Another feature of the new paradigm, which I will 
discuss in detail below, is what I call “media mobility.” A message never arrives at some 
final destination as in a broadcasting/mass publishing model. Instead, a message contin -
ues to move between sites, people, and devices. As it moves, it accumulates comments 
and discussions. Frequently, its parts are extracted and remixed with parts of other  
messages to create new messages.
The arrival of a new paradigm has been reflected in and supported by a set of new 
terms. The twentieth century terms “broadcasting,” “publishing,” and “reception” have 
been joined (and in many contexts, replaced), by new terms that describe operations 
now possible in relation to media messages, such as “narrowcasting,” “UGC,” and “Like.” 
They also include: embed, annotate, comment, respond, syndicate, aggregate, upload, 
download, rip, and share.
There are a number of interesting things worth noting in relation to this new vocabu -
lary. First, the new terms are more discriminating than the old ones as they now name 
many specific operations involved in communication. You don’t simply “receive” a mes -
sage; you can also annotate it, comment on it, remix it, etc. Second, most of the new 
terms describe new types of users’ activities which were either not possible with the old 
media or were strictly marginal (for instance, a marginal practice of “slash” videos made 
by science fiction fans). Third, if old terms such as “read,” “view,” and “listen” were 
media-specific, the new ones are not. For instance, you can “comment” on a blog, a 
photo, a video, a slide show, a map, etc. Similarly, you can “share” a video, a photo, an 
article, a map layer, and so on. This media-indifference of the terms indirectly reflects 
the media-indifference of the underlying software technologies. In effect, the important 
theme in the development of cultural software has been the development of new infor -
mation management principles and techniques—such as Doug Englebardt’s “view  
control”—which work in the same way on many types of media. Among these new 
terms, “remix” (or “mix”) occupies a major place. As the user-generated media content 
(video, photos, music, maps) on the Web exploded in 2005, an important semantic 
switch took place. The terms “remix” (or “mix”) and “mashup” started to be used in 
contexts where previously the term “editing” had been standard—for instance, when 
140
L. MANOVICHreferring to a user editing a video. When in the spring of 2007 Adobe released video 
editing software for users of the popular media-sharing website Photobucket, it named 
the software Remix. (The software was actually a stripped down version of one of the 
earliest video editing applications for PCs called Premiere.9) Similarly, Jumpcut, a free 
video editing and hosting site, does not use the word “edit.”10 Instead, it puts forward 
“remix” as the core creative operation: “You can create your own movie by remixing 
someone else’s movie.” Another popular online open-source video editing service 
Kaltura also uses the term “remix,” or “mashup” instead of “edit” (as of spring 2008).11
The new social communication paradigm where millions are publishing “content” 
into the “cloud” and an individual curates her personal mix of content drawn from this 
cloud would be impossible without new types of consumer applications, new software 
features and underlying software standards and technologies such as RSS. To make a 
parallel with the term “cloud computing,” we can call this paradigm “communication in 
a cloud.” If “cloud computing enables users and developers to utilize [IT] services with -
out knowledge of, expertise with, nor control over the technology infrastructure that 
supports them,”12 software developments of the 2000s similarly enable content creators 
and content receivers to communicate without having to deeply understand underlying 
technologies.
Another reason why a metaphor of a “cloud”—which at first appears vague—may also 
be better for describing communication patterns in the 2000s than the “Web” has to do 
with the changes in the patterns of information flow between the original Web and so-
called Web 2.0. The lack of a more sophisticated technology for “receiving” the Web in 
its original format was not an omission on the part of the Web’s architect Tim Berners-
Lee—it is just that nobody anticipated that the number of websites would explode 
exponentially.13
In the communication model that emerged after 2000, information is becoming more 
atomized. You can access individual atoms of information without having to read/view 
the larger packages in which it is enclosed (a TV program, a music CD, a book, a web -
site, etc.). Additionally, information is gradually becoming presentation- and device-
independent—it can be received using a variety of software and hardware technologies 
and stripped from its original format. Thus, while websites continue to flourish, it is no 
longer necessary to visit each site individually to access their content.
The software technologies used to send information into the cloud are complemented 
by software that allows people to curate (or “mix”) the information sources they are 
interested in. Software in this category is referred to as newsreaders, feed readers, or 
aggregators. Examples include separate Web-based feed readers such as Bloglines and 
Google Reader; all popular Web browsers that also provide functions to read feeds; 
desktop-based feed readers such as NetNewsWire; and personalized home pages such as 
live.com and My Yahoo!
Finally, if feed technologies turned the original Web of interlinked Web pages sites 
into a more heterogeneous and atomized global “cloud” of content, other software devel -
opments helped to make this cloud rapidly grow in size.14 It is not accidental that during 
the period when “user-generated content” started to grow exponentially, the interfaces 
of most consumer-level media applications came to prominently feature buttons and 
options which allow for the upload of new media documents into the “cloud.” For exam -
ple, iPhoto groups functions which allow the user to email photos, or upload them to 
her blog or website (under a top level “Share” menu). Similarly, Windows Live Photo 
Gallery includes “Publish” and “E-mail” among its top menu bar choices. Meanwhile, 
141
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAthe interfaces of social media sites were given buttons to easily move content around the 
“cloud,” so to speak—emailing it to others, embedding it in one’s website or blog, linking 
it, posting to one’s account on other popular social media sites, etc.
Regardless of how easy it is to create one personal mix of information sources—even 
if it only takes a single click—the practically unlimited number of these sources now 
available on the “cloud” means that manual ways of selecting among these sources 
become limited in value. Enter the automation. From the very beginning, computers 
were used to automate various processes. Over time, everything—factory work, flying 
planes, financial trading, or cultural processes—is gradually subjected to automation.15 
However, algorithmic automated reasoning on the Web arrived so quickly that it hardly 
has ever been publically discussed. We take it for granted that Google and other search 
engines automatically process tremendous amounts of data to deliver search results. We 
also take it for granted that Google’s algorithms automatically insert ads in Web pages 
by analyzing pages’ content. Flickr uses its own algorithm to select the photos it calls 
“interesting.”16 Pandora, Musicovery, OWL music search, and many other similar Web 
services automatically create music programs based on the users’ musical likes. Digg 
automatically pushes the stories up based on how many people have voted for them. 
Amazon and Barnes & Noble use collaborative filtering algorithms to recommend 
books; Last.fm and iTunes—to recommend music, Netflix—to recommend movies; 
StumbleUpon—to recommend websites; and so on.17 In contrast to these systems that 
provide recommendations by looking at the users that have similar rating patterns, 
Mufin is fully an automatic recommendation software for music which works by match -
ing songs based on 40 attributes such as tempo, instruments, and percussion.18
The use of automation to create mixes from hundreds of millions of information 
sources is just beginning. (The following examples refer to the state of the art in summer 
2008.) One already popular service is the Google News site that algorithmically assem -
bles “news” by remixing material gathered from thousands of news publications. (As it 
is usually the case with algorithms used by Web companies, when I checked last there 
was no information on the Google News website about the algorithm used, so we know 
nothing about its selection criteria or what counts as important and relevant news.) 
Newspond similarly automatically aggregates news, and it similarly discloses little about 
the process. According to its website, “Newspond’s articles are found and sorted by real-
time global popularity, using a fully automated news collection engine.”19 Spotplex 
assembles news from blogosphere using yet another type of automation: counting most 
read articles within a particular time frame.20 Going further, news.ask.com not only 
automatically selects the news but it also provides BigPicture pages for each news story 
containing relevant articles, blog posts, images, videos, and diggs.21 News.ask.com also 
tells us that it selects news stories based on four factors—breaking, impact, media, and 
discussion—and it actually shows how each story rates in terms of these factors. Another 
kind of algorithmic “news remix” is performed by the Web-art application 10×10 by 
Jonathan Harris. It presents a grid of news images based on the algorithmic analysis of 
news feeds from The New York Times , the BBC, and Reuters.22
Remix Versus Collection
Given the wide adoption of the term “remix” to describe many different cultural prac -
tices and technologies, do all of them actually qualify as remix? For instance, is the 
content automatically assembled by Google News, or manually by using an RSS reader 
142
L. MANOVICHactually constituted as a remix? Or shall we more accurately describe it as “collection” 
achieved through “selection,” or perhaps “curation”? After all, it would be a stretch to 
call one’s personal library a “remix” of the bookstore. Or would it?
In order to better differentiate between “selecting” and “remixing,” let’s compare con -
temporary online news portals with their predecessors—twentieth century newspapers. 
Consider a typical front page. To produce this page, the editors and designers did more 
than simply select a smaller number of content items from a larger set available. They 
also designed the page. The layout, the choice of photographs and headings, the relative 
size of the fonts—everything was carefully selected and edited. Just as is the case with 
any artwork which uses preexisting media content to create a new composition, a news -
paper page aims to communicate distinct meanings and emotions by arranging its con -
tent in particular ways. For me, it is an example of a remix in the twentieth century 
meaning of this word.
What is this meaning? A twentieth century “remix” is a particular case of a modern 
artistic composition (or “work”) in general. The key difference is the origin of parts. In 
a modern(ist) artwork, these parts are created specifically for this composition. In remix, 
they are selected from a larger, already existing set.
Therefore, we can define remix in this way: a composition that consists of previously 
existing parts assembled, which is edited to create particular aesthetic, semantic, and/or 
bodily effects.
Now that I have defined remix, I can formally state the difference between  “select -
ing” and “remixing.” When confronted with any set of items, no matter what its 
original purpose and method of production, gestalt psychology holds that a human 
mind will always try to establish some relationships between these items. For 
instance, if I have a personal library, I will think of the semantic relationships 
between the books on my bookshelves.  In the case of a collection, the defining relation -
ships are those between the items that are present and other potential items that are absent . 
My bookshelf can hold a limited number of books, so I always wonder about other 
“must have” books that I did not buy. Similarly, the collection of bookmarks in my 
browser is a selection from billions of pages on the Web. The collection consists of 
the pages that are important to me.
To generalize from these examples, we can say that a collection is created by reduction  
of a set of all possible items. Another crucial feature of a collection is that the order 
between any individual is not important. Think of an Excel spreadsheet which can be 
sorted by any column. Whatever order you may have defined is relative and can be 
changed at any time. Similarly, while the categories that I use to organize my bookmarks 
do matter, the order in which bookmarks appear within a particular folder is usually 
irrelevant. Thus, a key feature that signals that we are dealing with an artistic composi -
tion—the importance of the arrangement of parts—is absent.
In a remix, the defining relations are between the elements that are present . When you listen 
to a music remix, look at photo-collage, watch a fan video, or use a software mashup, 
you usually don’t wonder about all other songs, photos, videos, or data sources which 
could have been used. Instead, you are focused on the effect produced by the arrange -
ment of parts that are present.
This analysis, which foregrounds the absent–present dimension, may appear to be 
identical to the one I provided in The Language of New Media  when I discussed the dif -
ferences between a narrative and a database. However, it is different. In a syntagmatic 
structure such as a sentence or narrative the relationships are between present elements 
143
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAand similar elements that could have been used in their place . For instance, in a sentence “I 
have attended an interesting conference” there are certain other adjectives that can be 
used instead of “interesting” while maintaining the same grammatical structure and still 
keeping the statement meaningful. However, a set of items (such as a personal library) 
does not have an inherent grammatical structure. Consequently, in a collection we have 
relationships between present items and all other items available. Therefore, a collec -
tion is not a syntagm.
In practice, the differences between selecting and remixing are often quite subtle. 
What this means in practical terms is that we should not make decisions a priori about 
whole cultural practices being collections or remixes. Instead, we should consider each 
case individually to decide where it belongs on the spectrum of the collection/remix 
dimension. For instance, let’s compare Google Reader and iGoogle.23 Google Reader is 
a Web-based feeds reader; iGoogle is a customized home page that can display feeds 
along with gadgets (miniapplications which can show weather, currency rates, new 
emails, etc.). Although both applications have similar functionality, the interface of 
Google’s Reader produces a “collection,” while the interface of iGoogle creates a 
“remix.”
Google Reader presents feeds as a linear list. While the user can sort the feeds in a few 
ways and switch between an expanded view and list view, displaying full posts or display -
ing only headlines, Reader sticks to its preferred way of organizing information along a 
single vertical dimension, with the entries displayed one below another. For me this feels 
like a collection. When I use such interfaces, the relations between what is present and 
what is absent become quite important—between the feeds which I have subscribed to 
and all other subscriptions available on the Internet; between the items I have already 
read and those I did not. And while the ways in which I organize feeds into folders or 
tag them does affect how I think about them, I’m not creating a new composition based 
on the original feeds as I am in iGoogle. At any point I can filter this set by using a 
search box. And since the search allows me to reorganize my set of items in a multitude 
of ways, whatever higher levels of organization I impose on these items (folders, tags) 
becomes less relevant. Thus, it is the presence of the search box in a Google Reader 
interface that ultimately makes the set of feeds in its window a collection rather than a 
remix. With a search function available, the only two things that are truly relevant are 
(1) what is the body of information a search can be applied to, and (2) the options the 
search software provides.
In contrast, I think of the contents in my iGoogle page as a remix. Why? The iGoogle 
interface allows me to arrange feeds and gadgets over two dimensions of the page—hori -
zontally and vertically. In other words, I can create a composition made from parts. 
Thus, arranging the elements on iGoogle page is more like arranging objects and furni -
ture in one’s room than reading a newspaper or a news ticker (which is what using feed 
readers often feels like).
Why is arranging elements on an iGoogle page so important in contrast to the 
Google Reader experience? Because with iGoogle, I can’t search the contents of its 
page (or pages, since iGoogle allows me to organize information over a number of 
pages linked by tabs). Therefore it really matters where I put the gadgets in relation 
to each other. The position of each element’s frame reflects my habits and how I think 
about the information available to me. Taken together, the frames on my home page 
add up to a gestalt—an organized whole which mirrors the structure of my thinking 
and behavior.
144
L. MANOVICHAs I mentioned before starting this discussion of the examples of Google Reader and 
iGoogle, the details of their interfaces are likely to change by the time you read this—of 
course, you can always use the Way Back Machine to look at the old versions of the 
websites. However, I hope that the principle, i.e., the distinction between a remix and 
a collection, will continue to be applicable to new interface designs.
So far I have talked about remix technologies that allow a user to assemble pieces of 
content from different sources into a single place. What about these pieces themselves? 
If the old communication paradigm where professionally produced messages moved in 
linear and finite paths from producers to consumers was replaced by the “communica -
tion in a cloud” paradigm, did this also affect the identity of individual messages?
It has indeed. I think that it is legitimate to think of a great deal of “user-generated 
content” (UGC) as a result of various remix operations. (In other words, the frequent 
use of “remix” to describe UGC is justified.)
1. The bloggers who commonly republish materials from other sources while adding 
their own comments are in fact practicing a particular kind remix. In these cases, 
the modification of the original content—common to all types of remixes—takes 
the form of commentary.
2. A significant part of UGC available online is produced by users who directly remix 
media material produced by professionals. For instance, the genre of anime music 
videos involves creatively combining music ripped from professional music videos 
and pieces of anime edited together.
3. A common personal blog is a remix of material drawn from other sources and assem -
bled on one site (typically with some comments); this remix is available to others, 
who in turn may be creating their own remixes. In this respect, it is important that 
blog software allows for the modularity of each post—facilitating its reuse in other 
blogs. The same goes for other Web technologies such as “permalink” and the use 
of “share” buttons on social media sites. The availability of these tools around each 
piece of media content gives strong encouragement to users to include this content 
in their own remixes.
Remixability and Modularity
The dramatic increase in the availability of information greatly speeded up by the 
Web has been accompanied by another fundamental development. Imagine water 
running down a mountain. If the quantity of water keeps continuously increasing, 
it will find numerous new paths and these paths will keep getting wider. Something 
similar is happening as the amount of information keeps growing—except these 
paths are also all connected to each other and they go in all directions; up, down, 
sideways. Here are some of these paths, which facilitate the movement of informa -
tion between people, listed in no particular order: SMS, forward and redirect but -
tons in email applications, mailing lists, Web links, RSS, blogs, social bookmarking, 
tagging, publishing (as in publishing one’s playlist on a website), peer-to-peer net -
works, Web services, USB 3.0, Bluetooth. These paths stimulate people to draw 
information from all kinds of sources into their own space, remix, and make it avail -
able to others, and collaborate or at least play on a common information platform 
(Wikipedia, Flickr). Barb Dybwad introduced a nice term “collaborative remixabil -
ity’ ” to talk about this process:
145
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAI think the most interesting aspects of Web 2.0 are new tools that explore the 
continuum between the personal and the social, and tools that are endowed 
with a certain flexibility and modularity which enables collaborative remixa -
bility—a transformative process in which the information and media we’ve 
organized and shared can be recombined and built on to create new forms, 
concepts, ideas, mashups and services.”24
If a traditional twentieth century model of cultural communication described the move -
ment of information in one direction from a source to a receiver, now the reception 
point is just a temporary station on information’s path. If we compare information or 
media objects with a train, then each receiver can be compared to a train station. 
Information arrives, gets remixed with other information, and then the new package 
travels to other destination where the process is repeated.
We can find precedents for this “remixability”—for instance, in modern electronic 
music where remix has become the key method of creation since the 1980s. More gener -
ally, most human cultures developed by borrowing and reworking forms and styles from 
other cultures; the resulting “remixes” were later incorporated into other cultures. 
Ancient Rome remixed Ancient Greece; Renaissance remixed antiquity; nineteenth 
century European architecture remixed many historical periods including the 
Renaissance; and today graphic and fashion designers remix numerous historical and 
local cultural forms, from Japanese Manga to traditional Indian clothing.
At first glance it may seem that remixability as practiced by designers and other cul -
ture professionals is quite different from “vernacular” remixability made possible by the 
software-based techniques described above. Clearly, a professional designer working on 
a poster or a professional musician working on a new mix is different from somebody 
who is writing a blog entry or publishing her bookmarks.
But this is a wrong view. The perceived two kinds of remixability—professional and 
vernacular—are part of the same continuum, for the designer and musician are equally 
affected by the same software technologies. Design software and music composition 
software make the technical operation of remixing very easy; the Web greatly increases 
the ease of locating and reusing material from other periods, artists, designers, and so on. 
Even more importantly, since every company and freelance professional in all cultural 
fields, from motion graphics to architecture to fashion, publish documentation of their 
projects on their websites, everybody can keep up with what everybody else is doing. 
Therefore, although the speed with which a new original architectural solution starts 
showing up in projects of other architects and architectural students is much slower than 
the speed with which an interesting blog entry gets referenced in other blogs, the differ -
ence is quantitative, not qualitative. Similarly, when H&M or Gap can “reverse engi -
neer” the latest fashion collection by a high-end design label in only two weeks, this is 
an example of the same cultural remixability sped up by software and networked culture. 
In short, a person simply copying parts of a message into the new email she is writing, 
and the largest media and consumer company recycling designs of other companies are 
doing the same thing—they are practicing remixability.
Remixability does not require modularity (i.e., the organization of cultural objects 
into clearly separable parts)—but it greatly benefits from it. For example, as already 
discussed above, remixing in music became popular after the introduction of multitrack 
equipment. With each song element available on its own track, substituting tracks in 
new compositions becomes commonplace.
146
L. MANOVICHIn most cultural fields today we have a clear-cut separation between libraries of ele -
ments designed to be sampled—stock photos, graphic backgrounds, music, software 
libraries—and the cultural objects that incorporate these elements. For instance, a 
design for a corporate report or an ad may use photographs that the designer purchased 
from a photo stock house. But this fact is not advertised; similarly, the fact that this 
design (if it is successful) will be inevitably copied and sampled by other designers is not 
openly acknowledged by the design field. The only fields where sampling and remixing 
are done openly are music and computer programming, where developers rely on soft -
ware libraries in writing new software.
Will the separation between libraries of samples and “authentic” cultural works blur 
in the future? Will the future cultural forms be deliberately made from discrete samples 
designed to be copied and incorporated into other projects? It is interesting to imagine 
a cultural ecology where all kinds of cultural objects, regardless of the medium or mate -
rial, are made from Lego-like building blocks. The blocks come with complete informa -
tion necessary to easily copy and paste them in a new object—either by a human or 
machine. A block knows how to couple with other blocks—and it even can modify itself 
to enable such coupling. The block can also tell the designer and the user about its 
cultural history—the sequence of historical borrowings which led to the present form. 
And if the original Lego (or a typical twentieth century housing project) contains only 
a few kinds of blocks that make all objects one can design with the Lego rather similar 
in appearance, software can keep track of unlimited number of different blocks.
One popular twentieth century notion of cultural modularity involved artists, design -
ers, or architects making finished works from the small vocabulary of elemental shapes, 
or other modules. Whether we are talking about the construction industry, Kandinsky’s 
geometric abstraction, or modular furniture systems, the underlying principle is the 
same. The scenario I am entertaining proposes a very different kind of modularity that 
may appear like a contradiction in terms. It is modularity without a prior defined vocab -
ulary. In this scenario, any well-defined part of any finished cultural object can auto -
matically become a building block for new objects in the same medium. Parts can even 
“publish” themselves and other cultural objects can “subscribe” to them the way you 
subscribe now to RSS feeds or podcasts.
When we think of modularity today, we assume that a number of objects that can be 
created in a modular system is limited. Indeed, if we are building these objects from a 
very small set of blocks, there are a limited number of ways in which these blocks can 
go together. (Although as the relative physical size of the blocks in relation to the fin -
ished object get smaller, the number of different objects which can be built increases: 
think an IKEA modular bookcase versus a Lego set.) However, in my imaginary scenario 
modularity does not involve any reduction in the number of forms that can be gener -
ated. On the contrary, if the blocks themselves are created using one of many already 
developed software-based design methods (such as parametric design), every time they 
are used again they can modify themselves automatically to ensure that they look differ -
ent. In other words, if pre-software-modularity leads to repetition and reduction, post-
software-modularity can produce unlimited diversity.
I think that such “real time” or “on demand” modularity can only be imagined today 
after various large-scale projects created at the turn of the century—online stores such 
as Amazon, blog indexing services such as Technorati, buildings such as Yokohama 
International Port Terminal by Foreign Office Architects and Walt Disney Concert Hall 
in Los Angeles by Frank Gehry—visibly demonstrated that we can develop hardware 
147
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAand software to coordinate massive numbers of cultural objects and their building blocks: 
books, blog entries, construction parts. Whether we will ever have such a cultural ecol -
ogy is not important. We often look at the present by placing it within long historical 
trajectories. But I believe that we can also productively use a different, complementary 
method. We can imagine what will happen if the contemporary techno-cultural condi -
tions which are already firmly established are pushed to their logical limit. In other 
words, rather than placing the present in the context of the past, we can look at it in 
the context of a logically possible future. This “look from the future” approach may 
illuminate the present in a way not possible if we only “look from the past.” The sketch 
of a logically possible cultural ecology I just made is a little experiment in this method: 
futurology or science fiction as a method of contemporary cultural analysis.
So what else can we see today if we will look at it from this logically possible future of 
“total remixability” and universal modularity? If my scenario sketched above looks like 
a “cultural science fiction,” consider the process that is already happening at one end of 
the remixability continuum. This process is a gradual atomization of information on the 
Web that we already touched on earlier in this chapter. New software technologies sepa -
rate content from particular presentation formats, devices, and the larger cultural “pack -
ages” where it is enclosed by the producers. (For instance, consider how iTunes and 
other online music stores changed the unit of music consumption from a record/CD to 
a single music track.) In particular, the wide adoption and standardization of feed for -
mats allows cultural bits to move around more easily—changing a Web into what I call 
a “communication cloud.” The increased modularity of content allowed for a wide adop -
tion of remix as a preferred way of receiving it (although, as we saw, in many cases it is 
more appropriate to call the result a collection rather than a true remix).
The Web was invented by the scientists for scientific communication, and at first it 
was mostly text and “bare-bones” HTML. Like any other markup language, HTML was 
based on the principle of modularity (in this case, separating content from its presenta -
tion). And of course, it also brought a new and very powerful form of modularity: the 
ability to construct a single document from parts that may reside on different Web serv -
ers. During the period of the Web’s commercialization (the second part of the 1990s), 
twentieth century media industries that were used to producing highly structured infor -
mation packages (books, movies, records, etc.) similarly pushed the Web toward highly 
coupled and difficult-to-take-apart formats such as those developed for the Shockwave 
player, first created by Macromedia Flash. However, since approximately 2000, we see a 
strong move in the opposite direction: from intricately packaged and highly designed 
“information objects” (or “packages”) which are hard to take apart—such as websites 
made in Flash—to “straight” information: ASCII text files, RSS feeds, blog posts, KML 
files, SMS messages, and microcontent. As Richard MacManus and Joshua Porter wrote 
in 2005,
Enter Web 2.0, a vision of the Web in which information is broken up into 
“microcontent” units that can be distributed over dozens of domains. The Web 
of documents has morphed into a Web of data. We are no longer just looking 
to the same old sources for information. Now we’re looking to a new set of tools 
to aggregate and remix microcontent in new and useful ways.25
And it is much easier to “aggregate and remix microcontent” if it is not locked by a 
design. An ASCII file, a JPEG image, a map, a sound or video file can move around 
148
L. MANOVICHthe Web and enter into user-defined remixes such as a set of RSS feed subscriptions; 
cultural objects where the parts are locked together (such as Flash interface) can’t. In 
short, in the era of Web 2.0, we can state that information wants to be ASCII . If we 
approach the present from the perspective of a potential future of “ultimate modular -
ity/remixability,” we can see other incremental steps toward this future which are 
already occurring.
Creative Commons developed a set of flexible licenses that give the producers of crea -
tive work in any field more options than the standard copyright terms. The licenses have 
been widely used by individuals, nonprofits and companies—from MIT Open Course 
Initiative and Australian Government to Flickr and blip.tv. The available types include 
Attribution-ShareAlike (CC BY-SA), which “lets others remix, tweak, and build upon 
your work even for commercial purposes, as long as they credit you and license their new 
creations under the identical terms.”26
In 2005 a team of artists and developers from around the world set out to collaborate 
on an animated short film Elephants Dream  using only open-source software;27 after the 
film was completed, all production files from the move (3D models, textures, anima -
tions, etc.) were published on a DVD along with the film itself.28
Flickr offers multiple tools to combine multiple photos (not broken into parts—at 
least so far) together: tags, sets, groups, Organizr. The Flickr interface thus positions each 
photo within multiple “mixes.” Flickr also offers “notes” which allows the users to assign 
short notes to individual parts of a photograph. To add a note to a photo posted on 
Flickr, you draw a rectangle on any part of the phone and then attach some text to it. A 
number of notes can be attached to the same photo. I read this feature as another sign 
of the modularity/remixability paradigm, as it encourages users to mentally break a 
photo into separate parts. In other words, “notes” break a single media object—a pho -
tograph—into blocks.
In a similar fashion, the common interface of DVDs breaks a film into chapters. 
Media players such as iPod and online media stores such as iTunes break music CDs 
into separate tracks—making a track into a new basic unit of musical culture. In all 
these examples, what was previously a single coherent cultural object is broken into 
separate blocks that can be accessed individually. In other words, if “information 
wants to be ASCII,” “content wants to be modular.” And culture as a whole? Culture 
has always been about remixability—but now this remixability is available to all par -
ticipants of Web culture.
Since the introduction of the first Kodak camera, “users” had tools to create massive 
amounts of vernacular media. Later they were given amateur film cameras, tape record -
ers, video recorders  . . . But the fact that people had access to “tools of media produc -
tion” for as long as the professional media creators until recently did not seem to play a 
big role: the amateur and professional media pools did not mix. Professional photographs 
traveled between a photographer’s darkroom and newspaper editor; private pictures of a 
wedding traveled between members of the family. But the emergence of multiple and 
interlinked paths which encourage media objects to easily travel between websites, 
recording and display devices, hard drives and flash drives, and, most importantly,  
people changes things. Remixability becomes practically a built-in feature of digital 
networked media universe. In a nutshell, what may be more important than the intro -
duction of a video iPod (2001), YouTube (2005), the first consumer 3-CCD camera 
which can record full HD video (HD Everio GZ-HD7, 2007), or yet another exiting new 
device or service is how easy it is for media objects to travel between all these devices 
149
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAand services—which now all become just temporary stations in media’s Brownian 
motion.
Modularity and the “Culture Industry”
Although we have witnessed a number of important new types of cultural modularity 
that emerged in the software era, it is important to remember that modularity is some -
thing that only applies to RSS, social bookmarking, or Web services. We are talking 
about the larger cultural logic that extends beyond the Web and digital culture.
Modularity has been the key principle of modern mass production. That is, mass 
production is possible because of the standardization of parts and how they fit with each 
other—i.e., modularity. Although there are historical precedents for mass production, 
until the twentieth century they have been separate historical cases. But after Ford 
installed the first moving assembly lines at his factory in 1913, others followed.29 Soon 
modularity permeated most areas of modern society.
Today we are still living in an era of mass production and mass modularity, and glo -
balization and outsourcing only strengthen this logic. One commonly evoked character -
istic of globalization is greater connectivity—places, systems, countries, organizations, 
etc. becoming connected in more and more ways. Although there are ways to connect 
things and processes without standardizing and modularizing them—and the further 
development of such mechanisms is probably essential if we ever want to move beyond 
all the grim consequences of living in a standardized modular world produced by the 
twentieth century—for now it appears so much easier just to go ahead and apply the 
twentieth century logic. Because society is so used to it, it is not even thought of as one 
option among others.
In November 2005 I was at a Design Brussels event where well-known designer Jerszy 
Seymour speculated that once Rapid Manufacturing systems become advanced, cheap, 
and easy, this will give designers in Europe hope for survival. Today, as Seymour pointed 
out, as soon as some design becomes successful, a company wants to produce it in large 
quantities—and its production goes to China. He suggested that when Rapid 
Manufacturing and similar technologies were installed locally, the designers would 
become their own manufacturers and everything could happen in one place. But obvi -
ously this will not happen tomorrow, and it is also not at all certain that Rapid 
Manufacturing will ever be able to produce complete finished objects without humans 
being involved in the process.
Of course, modularity principles did not remain unchanged since the beginning of 
mass production some hundred years ago. Think of just-in-time manufacturing, just-in-
time programming or the use of standardized containers for shipment around the world 
since the 1960s (over 90 percent of all goods in the world today are shipped in these 
containers). The logic of modularity seems to be permeating more layers of society than 
ever before, and software—which is great at keeping track of numerous parts and coor -
dinating their movements—only helps this process.
The logic of culture often runs behind the changes in economy (resulting in an une -
ven development)—so while modularity has been the basis of modern industrial society 
since the early twentieth century, we have only started to see the modularity principle 
in cultural production and distribution on a large scale in the last few decades. While 
Adorno and Horkheimer were writing about the “culture industry” in the early 1940s, 
it was not then—just as it is not today —a true modern industry.30 In some areas such as 
150
L. MANOVICHthe large-scale production of Hollywood animated features or computer games we see 
more of the factory logic at work with extensive division of labor. In the case of software 
engineering, software is put together to a large extent from already available software 
modules—but this is done by individual programmers or teams who often spend months 
or years on one project, which is quite different from the Ford production line model 
that was assembling one identical car after another in rapid succession. In short, today 
cultural modularity has not reached the systematic character of the industrial standardi -
zation circa 1913.
But this does not mean that modularity in contemporary culture simply lags behind 
industrial modularity. Rather, cultural modularity seems to be governed by a different 
logic. In terms of packaging and distribution, “mass culture” has indeed achieved com -
plete industrial-type standardization. In other words, all the material carriers of cultural 
content in the twentieth century have been standardized, just as it was done in the 
production of all other goods—from the first photo and film formats at the end of the 
nineteenth century to game cartridges, DVDs, memory cards, interchangeable camera 
lenses, and so on today. But the actual making of content was never standardized in the 
same way. In “Culture Industry Reconsidered,” Adorno writes:
The expression ‘industry’ is not to be taken too literally. It refers to the stand -
ardization of the thing itself—such as that of the Western, familiar to every 
movie-goer—and to the rationalization of distribution techniques, but not 
strictly to the production process  . . . it [culture industry] is industrial more in a 
sociological sense, in the incorporation of industrial forms of organization even 
when nothing is manufactured—as in the rationalization of office work—rather 
than in the sense of anything really and actually produced by technological 
rationality.31
So while culture industries, at their worst, continuously put out seemingly new cultural 
products (films, television programs, songs, games, etc.) which are created from a limited 
repertoire of themes, narratives, icons, and other elements using a limited number of 
conventions, these products are conceived by the teams of human authors on a one-by-
one basis—not by software. In other words, while software has been eagerly adopted to 
help automate and make more efficient lower levels of the cultural production (such as 
generating in-between frames in an animation or keeping track of all files in a produc -
tion pipeline), humans continue to control the higher levels, which means that the 
semiotic modularity of cultural industries’ products—i.e., their Lego-like construction 
from mostly preexistent elements already familiar to consumers—is not something 
acknowledged or thought about.
The trend toward the reuse of cultural assets in commercial culture, i.e., media fran -
chising—characters, settings, icons which appear not in one but a whole range of cul -
tural products—film sequels, computer games, theme parks, toys, etc.—does not seem 
to change this basic “preindustrial” logic of the production process. For Adorno, the 
individual character of each product is part of the ideology of mass culture: “Each prod -
uct affects an individual air; individuality itself serves to reinforce ideology, in so far as 
the illusion is conjured up that the completely reified and mediated is a sanctuary from 
immediacy and life.”32
Neither the fundamental reorganization of culture industries around software-based 
production in the 1990s nor the rise of user-generated content and social media 
151
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIAparadigms in the 2000s threatened the Romantic ideology of an artist-genius. However, 
what seems to be happening is that the “users” themselves have been gradually “modu -
larizing” culture. In other words, modularity has been coming into mass culture from the 
outside, so to speak, rather than being built in, as in industrial production. In the 1980s 
musicians started sampling already published music; TV fans start sampling their favorite 
TV series to produce their own “slash films,” game fans started creating new game levels 
and all other kinds of game modifications, or “mods.” (Mods “new items, modded weap -
ons, characters, enemies, models, textures, levels, story lines, music, money, armor, life 
and game modes.”33) And of course, from the very beginning of mass culture in the early 
twentieth century, artists immediately starting sampling and remixing mass cultural 
products—think of collage and photomontage practices that became popular right after 
World War I among artists in Russia and Germany. This continued throughout the 
twentieth century with Pop Art, appropriation art, and video art, and beyond in net art 
and new media practices.
Enter the computer. In The Language of New Media  I named modularity as one of the 
trends I saw in a culture undergoing computerization. If before modularity the principle 
was applied to the packaging of cultural goods and raw media (photo stock, blank vide -
otapes, etc.), computerization modularizes culture on a structural level. Images are bro -
ken into pixels; graphic designs, film, and video are broken into layers in Photoshop, 
After Effects, and other media design software. Hypertext modularizes text. Markup 
languages such as HTML and media formats such as QuickTime modularize multimedia 
documents in general. This all already happened by 1999 when I was finishing The 
Language of New Media ; as we saw in this chapter, soon thereafter the adoption of Web 
feed formats such as RSS further modularized media content available on the Web, 
breaking many types of packaged information into atoms.
Culture has already been modular for a long time. But with a nod to Bruno Latour: 
“we have never been modular”34—which I think is a very good thing.
Notes
 1 Ulf Poschardt, DJ Culture , trans. Shaun Whiteside (London: Quartet Books Ltd, 1998), 123.
 2 Ibid., 271.
 3 Roland Barthes, Image-Music-Text , translated by Stephen Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 146.
 4 Bruce Sterling. Shaping Things  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005).
 5 Hernando Gomez Salinas, “Buenos Aires,” The, 1 (September, 2007), p. 8.
 6 http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/13.07/intro.html (accessed February 4, 2007).
 7 Of course, the twentieth century terms and the paradigm behind them did not disappear overnight. Modern 
media industries which were established in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, i.e., before the arrival 
of the Web—newspapers, television, film industry, book and music publishing, video games—continue with 
the old paradigm: small number of producers creating content distributed to much larger audiences. (“Small” 
and “large” are relative numbers. In 2005, 172,000 new titles were published in US alone, while 206,000 
were published in the UK. How is that for a “small” number of producers?) However, even for these “going 
digital” (or, perhaps, “resisting the digital” would be more precise) industries the Web changed the rules of 
the game. Here traditional large-scale media industries are competing with numerous small-size produc -
ers—including individuals—in the same space. And since in comparison to selling physical products like 
music CDs, the distribution and stocking costs for digital files are tiny while the numbers of customers are 
much greater, this leads to a so-called “long tail” phenomenon. Now “top 40” items account for only 20 
percent of the sales, while the other “nonhits” account for the remaining 80 percent.
 8 Thomas Vander Wal, “Understanding the Personal Info Cloud: Using the Model of Attraction,” presen -
tation at University of Maryland, June 8, 2004 http://www.vanderwal.net/essays/moa/040608/040608.pdf 
(accessed February 28, 2008).
152
L. MANOVICH 9 http://www.webware.com/8301-1_109-9689909-2.html (accessed July 29, 2007).
10 http://jumpcut.com (accessed April 5, 2008).
11 http://www.kaltura.com (accessed April 5, 2008) and http://pixelfish.com (accessed August 25, 2014).
12 Krissi Danielsson, “Distinguishing Cloud Computing from Utility Computing,” www.ebizq.net, March 
26, 2008. http://www.ebizq.net/blogs/saasweek/2008/03/distinguishing_cloud_computing/.
13 This happened after the first graphical browsers were introduced in 1993. In 1998 First Google index 
collected 26 million pages; in 2000 it already had one billion; on June 25, 2008, Google engineers 
announced on Google blog that they collected one trillion unique URLs. http://googleblog.blogspot.
co.uk/2008/07/we-knew-web-was-big.html (accessed September 7, 2008).
14 For detailed statistics on the social media usage and growth between 2006 and 2012, see http://dsteven -
white.com/2013/02/09/social-media-growth-2006-to-2012/ (accessed August 25, 2014).
15 See Lev Manovich, “Principles of New Media” in The Language of New Media  (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2001).
16 http://www.flickr.com/explore/interesting/ (accessed March 1, 2008).
17 iTunes calls its automation feature Genius sidebar; it is designed to make “playlists in your song library 
that go great together” and also to recommend “music from the iTunes Stores that you don’t already have. 
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering.
18 Eliot Van Buskirk, “Signal Patterns: A Socially-Networked Music Personality Test,” http://archive.wired.
com/business/2008/12/socially-networ/, December 16, 2008 (accessed August 25, 2014).
19 http://www.newspond.com/about/ (accessed March 1, 2008).
20 Formerly available at: http://www.spotplex.com/help (last accessed March 1, 2008).
21 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ask_BigNews (accessed September 8, 2008).
22 www.tenbyten.org (accessed July 29, 2007).
23 The following discussion refers to the versions available in February 2008, so the interfaces and function -
ality of both programs may be different by the time you read this.
24 “Approaching a definition of Web 2.0,” The Social Software Weblog, formerly available at: socialsoft -
ware.weblogsinc.com (accessed October 28, 2005). For other definitions of Web 2.0, see Tim O’Reilly’s 
article “What is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software,” 
September 30, 2005 at http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html (accessed August 25, 2014).
25 “Web 2.0 for Designers,” in “Web 2.0 Design: Bootstrapping the Social Web,” Digital Web Magazine , 
http://www.digital-web.com/articles/web_2_for_designers/ (accessed October 28, 2005).
26 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ (accessed August 25, 2014).
27 http://orange.blender.org (accessed September 9, 2008).
28 http://orange.blender.org/production-planning (accessed September 9, 2008).
29 “An assembly line is a manufacturing process (most of the time called a progressive assembly) in which 
parts (usually interchangeable parts) are added as the semi-finished assembly moves from work station to 
work station where the parts are added in sequence until the final assembly is produced.” http://en.wiki -
pedia.org/wiki/Assembly_line (accessed July 31, 2014).
30 Theodor W . Adorno and Max Horkheimer, “The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception,” 
in Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments  (Amsterdam: Querido  Verlag,1947).
31 Theodor W . Adorno, “Culture Industry Reconsidered,” New German Critique  6, Fall 1975, 12–19, https://
www.sfu.ca/~andrewf/Culture_industry_reconsidered.shtml.
32 Ibid.
33 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mod_%28computer_gaming%29 (accessed July 31, 2014).
34 This phrase is an appropriation of Bruno Latour’s We Have Never Been Modern .
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor W . “Culture Industry Reconsidered.” New German Critique  6, Fall 1975: 12–19, 
https://www.sfu.ca/~andrewf/Culture_industry_reconsidered.shtml (accessed August 25, 2005).
Adorno, Theodor W ., and Max Horkheimer. “The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass 
Deception.” In Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments , Amsterdam: Querido  Verlag, 
1947.
Barthes, Roland. Image-Music-Text , translated by Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
153
REMIX STRATEGIES IN SOCIAL MEDIADanielsson, Krissi. “Distinguishing Cloud Computing from Utility Computing,” www.ebizq.net, March 
26, 2008. http://www.ebizq.net/blogs/saasweek/2008/03/distinguishing_cloud_computing/ (accessed 
September 7, 2008).
Gomez Salinas, Hernando. “Buenos Aires.” The 1, September, 2007.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Poschardt, Ulf. DJ Culture , translated by Shaun Whiteside. London: Quartet Books Ltd, 1998.
Sterling, Bruce. Shaping Things . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Vander Wal, Thomas. “Understanding the Personal Info Cloud: Using the Model of Attraction,” 
presentation at University of Maryland, June 8, 2004. http://www.vanderwal.net/essays/
moa/040608/040608.pdf (accessed February 28, 2008).
10
REMIXING MOVIES  
AND TRAILERS  
BEFORE AND AFTER  
THE DIGITAL AGE
Nicola Maria Dusi
Trailers Before Digital Cinema
Trailers of modern and contemporary movies present pathways, previews of upcoming 
movies. These micronarrations disrupt the space-time order of the plot in a new (fictive) 
narrative track. This common destructuring provides the film with an opportunistic 
reconstruction; and a consistent “trailer aesthetic” is often achieved through voice-over 
or music leitmotiv.1 According to Genette,2 the trailer belongs to the “paratext” (or 
better still the “public epitext” like press books or playbills),3 and lies in the blurred area 
not only of “transition,” but also “transaction,” a communication strategy and practice 
defined by the presence of the author’s (or their financial sponsor’s) intention and 
responsibility. The trailer is a strategic communication that creates hype for the film 
while drawing the attention of its future audiences. Besides promoting the upcoming 
movie, paratexts work as reading instructions: they provide potential audiences with an 
early understanding of the film’s genre and theme, and open a cognitive and affective 
challenge linked to a viewer’s curiosity about the film.
An effective trailer is always built from a consistent enunciative choice and a domi -
nant “thematic isotopy.”4 In semiotic terms, this is a guideline, a consistent semantic 
organization linking together the sequences of the audiovisual text from a discursive 
point of view. When watching the trailer, the audience acquires a specific “intertextual 
competence”5 and will expect to find in the movie some of the prevailing isotopies—
more often affective constants—provided by the trailer.
The trailer, like the remake, is at first familiar due to its repetition and then under -
stood as a result of its difference from the related movie. This is not a mere summary, but 
a targeted synthesis, which takes the new communication purpose into account in the 
reformulation of the source text for promotional reasons, in order to raise the curiosity 
and expectations in the audience. In order to interpret the movie in the right way, the 
trailer should present and outline only part of the narrative, with a focus on thematic, 
figurative isotopies deemed important for their persuasive elements. Furthermore, 
155
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERStrailers produce cognitive and affective attitudes, attraction, and interest for the movie 
being promoted in terms of, among other things, their expressive and stylistic construc -
tion, thus conveying perceptive-sensory experiences and stylistic features from the 
source text.
In this work I assume that a traditional trailer may be considered a type of intrasemiotic 
translation  of its source.6 A good trailer works like a translation in its attempt to raise in 
its audience effects of meaning similar to those expected by the movie in its specific text 
organization. Up to the late 1990s, the primary purpose of the trailer was to give audi -
ences a taste of the pie (the film) in order to encourage them to view the complete 
feature in the theater. Is this still true for trailers made in the twenty-first century, during 
the time of the participatory Web? These days, short audiovisual forms have exploded 
in a myriad of clips for every possible genre and format, disseminated and reinvented 
innumerable times on video and social sharing websites.
I will discuss some examples of these new practices in movie consumption, exploring 
the so-called “sweded” short, self-made remakes and some typologies of “remix” trailers. 
To conclude, I will argue that these new digital trailers of the do-it-yourself (DIY) age 
deeply transform the meanings and forms of the source film through a rewriting operation 
that still remains an intrasemiotic translation  even if “opened” through a composite and 
creative reformulation .
The Explosion of Trailers in the Digital Era
In today’s medial scenario, some scholars consider the trailer to be one of the winning 
short forms,7 which expand its visibility beyond previews in movie theaters and TV 
screens and invade the Web and new digital platforms. In this trend, the trailer as a para -
text is weakened in favor of a new textual and aesthetic autonomy. What remains is the 
play on the audience’s knowledge as they are called upon to fill in gaps or learn more 
about a film.
With those we could generally dub as remix trailers  found on the Web, just the oppo -
site is true. In these instances of creative—often amateur—reformulation, the source 
material is considered well known, and it is precisely on this shared knowledge that the 
individual variation of “participative audiences” comes about.8 Producing a remix trailer 
and posting it on the Web often means mocking the top-down production logics of the 
audiovisual system, but it also shows the remixer’s ability to communicate with an 
already knowledgeable community of fans. Inevitably this also means increasing the 
value of the source cultural product.9
Prosumers in remix cultures10 or mashup cultures11 reverse and expand the areas of 
value transmission, considering that nowadays the effort to convey values and emotions, 
topics, and narrative shapes moves from the producer to the audience.
The contemporary digital mediascape—most notably social media websites—offers a 
great many cases of derived texts that reuse a source text to produce something modified 
and unexpected. Movie trailers, as stated above, are short audiovisual promotional texts 
linked to the source material (the film) in an expected way that mixes reformulation 
and reinterpretation in unexpected ways. Movies and trailers on the Web become a free 
archive of cultural products to be selected and reopened by users and fans, transformed 
and reused through a creative DIY or bricolage , to develop something new with old 
materials. According to Jenkins:
156
N. M. DUSIA new aesthetic based on remixing and repurposing media content has flowed 
across the culture—from work done by media professionals in Hollywood or 
artists working in top museums to teenagers mashing up their favorite anime 
series on their home computers or hip hop DJs mixing and matching musical 
elements across different genres.12
“Remix” trailers differ from “mashup” trailers: the former use materials from a unique 
source, or at least a coherent one, such as a movie or a trailer,13 while the latter use 
several diverse source texts and involve selecting and reassembling footage taken from films 
belonging to different genres, very distant in terms of style and form .14
Both forms of trailers could become a way of subverting the values and the narrative 
logics of a well-known blockbuster film. They may even create a source text that does 
not exist, as can be seen in the new trend of fake trailers. For example, on YouTube you 
can easily find several music videos that remix the credits of Trainspotting15 in order to 
promote a new song and musician, or one that reuses footage from Fellini’s 8½ to pro -
mote the rapper Eminem in 8½ Mile  citing the biopic film 8 Mile .16
In my view, the most interesting case studies are fake trailers that YouTube users have 
created for movies like Fellini’s Il viaggio di Mastorna  (Mastorna’s Journey ), which was 
never actually made, as well as sequels of movies with a tragic ending, such as Titanic17 
in which the main character lives a new life in contemporary New York. In Titanic Two: 
the Surface (Figure 10.1 ),18 after being found frozen in the deep ocean and resurrected 
through modern technology, Jack Dawson searches for his love Rose, discovering on TV 
news that she has just died at the age of 102. This fake trailer, a “reflexive” mashup,19 
cuts and pastes with clever editing some selected scenes of Di Caprio in Catch Me If You 
Can,20 Romeo + Juliet ,21 and Titanic . According to Jenkins, these rewriting practices should 
be analyzed in the light of the social interaction of fans in online fan communities.  According 
Figure 10.1   Screen shots from Robert Blankenheim’s “ Titanic Two: the Surface ” 
(courtesy of Robert Blankenheim—http://robertblankenheim.com)
157
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERSto Tryon,22 these manipulation practices are fueled by the urgency to extend the pleasure of 
the original cinematic experience. Peverini23 states that on the Web, many fan communities 
operate on the closed filmic text by inserting into it a large quantity of fictional tales, dis -
courses and fragments. These expressive forms are linked to the original text but at the same 
time they demonstrate a certain degree of semiotic autonomy: “the film consequently 
explodes in a multitude of texts, different for format, genre and editing style. These new texts 
are interconnected and can trigger debates that involve their own authors and interpretative 
communities.”24
In some cases, the pleasure associated with the making and consuming of self-produced 
texts is indeed triggered by the creative process of reopening the film’s sign process. It is 
something I have tried to define with my co-author Spaziante  in 2006, at the very begin -
ning of these phenomena, considering the emerging trend linked to the reiterated pleasure 
to deconstruct texts, shared by communities and networks, as a widening of the original 
intertextual connections. In this way these connections can be intended as a big collective 
game of reinterpretation and enhancement of the “mythopoietic processes.”25
Sweded Trailers
Anyone who has seen the movie Be Kind Rewind26 will remember the “sweded films,” 
that is, the short “self-remakes” of blockbuster films. They are self-made short movies, 
low-fi and low budget forms of remix. I consider them as an experimental form of the 
future remix trailers, namely a first step to better understand the explosion of prosumer 
trailers self-published on the Web.  Be Kind Rewind  provides some clear examples of the 
practice of “sweding,” something immediately promoted on the film by its director 
Michel Gondry. Anybody could create a digital short film and post it, and, indeed, many 
fans of the movie created sweded short features that appear on the film’s website.27 These 
remakes were ludic reinterpretations, pastiches, and parodies. An example of a home-
made remake is the sweded film The Shining (2008).28 In just a few minutes, the clip 
summarizes the most important moments of Kubrick’s 1980 original, using a linear nar -
rative approach. The remix is comically low-fi and its formal solutions are amateurish.
An example is the famous close-up of John’s face (Jack Nicholson) glimpsed through 
the gashes made by his hatchet on the door, when he tries to get to his wife barricaded 
in the hotel pantry ( Figure 10.2 ). Here, the door and the face shot are recalled through 
a thin piece of wood torn in two pieces and held with both hands by the protagonist. 
Another feature of this revisited in an amateur style is the original sound track totally 
sung (as a cover) by the hoarse voice of the actor. The sweded version of The Shining 
patches together at least three sources: Kubrick’s original film, its official trailer com -
posed of short scenes edited in a nonlinear fashion, as well as the under-two-minutes-
long teaser trailer, considered by critics and fans one of the best horror trailers in the 
history of cinema, with its fixed frame of a door inside the hotel, which is suddenly 
flooded in blood. In the end of the sweded  Shining , a cardboard model of the hotel doors 
is washed out with a red liquid by the narrator/protagonist who is nonchalantly 
humming.
These sweded short remakes exemplify three practices:29 first, the home-made movie 
as a form of self-expression; second, the reuse of some key scenes which is the intertex -
tual translation of some topoi of the source film; third, the  pastiche  content form of this 
re-creation. These short remakes reinterpret the dominant guidelines (isotopies) of the 
source films, alongside a simplification. They are a form of special reworking, holding 
158
N. M. DUSItogether several sources all from the same movie, thus belonging to the remix  
family. With their urgency to reprocess the source film rigorously they share, however, 
the logics of film remake, at least in the rule of maintaining the “affective tonality” of 
the source film.30
Typologies of Remixed Trailers
It is not by chance that I chose the example of the sweded movie, for it is precisely The 
Shining  cult movie which was reedited in one of the most famous fake trailers, The 
Shining (Spoof Trailer) —a viral video aired in 2005 in the video sharing websites, and 
rapidly after that on YouTube.31 This fake trailer of The Shining32 reprocesses the sound 
track thus creating a romantic subtext with Peter Gabriel’s song “Solsbury Hill.” It also 
recuts the scenes where the characters meet, thus presenting a new narrative plot, all 
developed in a comedic style. In particular, the exchanges between father and son, 
before and during their stay in the Overlook Hotel, outline the transformation of their 
relationship from their distance to a newly found union. The fake trailer stresses the 
distance between producers and consumers, fans and filmmakers through the use of 
parody. According to Tryon, it is not only the movie but the trailer itself that is the 
object of parody, and “the uncanny disjunction between Kubrick’s horror film and 
Ryang’s remix enabled the video to find an audience very quickly while spawning a 
Figure 10.2   Screen shots from “The Shining—Sweded” by Paul Hurley (courtesy of Paul 
Hurley; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2unsGNFdts)
159
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERSnumber of imitations and video responses, as others experimented with the fake trailer 
format.”33
Tryon’s work, from which I quote, presents a systematization of the changing and 
complex phenomenon of video sharing and movie remixing in the Web. According to 
Tryon, the participatory culture of digital video makers in the area of DIY is based on 
the new competences assigned to film audiences starting from the introduction of bonus 
content in DVDs, as well as on the huge quantity of movies now made available in the 
digital era. The contemporary redefinition of cinematic text also explodes in the Web 
2.0, expanding the possible worlds of films into new transmedia narrative universes,34 
and adds value to the short formats, like the different clips taking pieces from films, 
through appropriations, sampling and quotations, remixes and mashups.35 An example 
of this is the practice of manipulating the source film, like the reediting mentioned by 
Peverini,36 in which sequences belonging to the same film are simply taken from the 
original text and reedited in another order. Or the different operations of fan fictions
that germinates from the narrative and stylistic construction of the original film and 
can be connected to it using various strategies and logics: fan-made stories can 
design a new frame around the original narration, or tell prologues and epilogues, 
or fill blank spaces in the plot.37
The explosion of the trailer format we are talking about in this chapter thus falls within 
the framework of a larger phenomenon which has brought about a series of new practices 
in movie consumption, from video-on-demand of pay TV to the downloading of peer-
to-peer systems and the Web sharing of personal videos with wide and flexible commu -
nities. As Jenkins has stated,38 this is not the reason why audiences have stopped 
following festivals or going to the cinema, as instead this has rather multiplied the ways 
in which they can find access to wanted content.
According to Tryon, while digital cinema is changing the previous forms and practices 
of watching, as well as of distributing, exhibiting, and promoting movies, it should also 
be considered that viewings on computer screens, smartphones or tablets are mostly a 
“means for watching short videos such as trailers or teasers rather than viewing an entire 
film on a three-inch screen.”39 Marketing strategies in the entertainment industry have 
come to comprise not only the major media corporations, but also new distribution 
practices of DIY independent filmmakers, and move in the direction of using the fan 
practices of digital cinema to expand the consumption of Hollywood films in general, 
involving at times audiences in the production process of studios,40 besides tempting 
audiences to see the upcoming new movie. In the chapter “Hollywood Remixed,” Tryon 
explores amateur activities like the self-production of movie remixes or movie mashups, 
by fans using the cult movies to reinterpret them, and suggests that, were we to analyze 
remixed movies and trailers in their entirety, we would find a sort of canon created by 
fans and film geeks to express their “cinematic sensibilities.”41 Tryon also explains some -
thing very interesting for the purposes of our discussion: “The videos constitute not only 
complex reinterpretations of the remixed films and genres but also of trailers themselves. 
By exposing the conventions of movie trailers and other promotional shorts, the remixes 
have the effect of mocking these marketing conventions.”42
In his exploration of the movie remix and mashup complexity, Tryon suggests focusing 
on two relevant categories: the genre remix  and the compilation video . In the first, “trailers 
are recut, often with sound cues from outside the original film, to create the illusion that 
160
N. M. DUSIa film is of a different genre.”43 In this way Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining  becomes a  
family comedy. But trailers may also be replayed in terms of the relationship between 
genre and gender, as in Brokeback trailers . According to Tryon, after the trailer for Lee’s 
Brokeback Mountain44 many remix trailers recut the film to create the illusion that the 
movie features a homosexual romance.45 The case of compilation videos is different, as 
with the “Five-Second Movies” series in which a film is condensed in a few seconds in 
a mostly parodistic way.46
All types of practices and new textualities on the Web are forcibly temporary. What 
is of interest in Tryon’s argument is the effort to reason on transformations in contem -
porary film culture that are brought to light in remix trailers. The fake trailers, like many 
parodies of Hollywood film sequences, enable audiences to critically reinterpret genres 
and their mechanisms intertextually, triggering at times debates and criticism about 
marketing strategies of Hollywood films and contributing to an increased awareness of 
popular culture. Political satire has always been one of the reasons for movie remixes, a 
semiotic way of turning these videos “into a self-conscious form of pop-political com -
mentary.”47 In any case, even criticism ends up by belonging to a much wider promo -
tional culture producing added value, even indirectly.48
Peverini49 presents a map in progress  of audiovisual changes of movies on the Web 
based on the case study of a single film in the Batman saga: The Dark Knight50 and the 
transmedia proliferation of many short forms of remixes. The Dark Knight  is a successful 
movie, living in the intertextuality with other languages such as comics and many adap -
tations, remakes, and videogames. Peverini51 defines movie remixes as “reworking prac -
tices” of intertextual deformation and reprocessing. For example, it happens that social 
knowledge around the film condenses on a single iconic trait: the smile of the Joker, the 
antagonist of the superhero, played in this film by Heath Ledger. Fans use this detail as 
a synecdoche of the entire film and its symbolic apparatus in order to create many reen -
actments or impressions: short videos in which we may find a reinterpretation of the 
Joker’s monologue by individual performers in front of their webcam. These give proof 
of acting prowess yet fall within the boundaries of the context, inside a community shar -
ing knowledge and taste for a given film. Peverini argues that it is possible to juxtapose 
reworking practices, which are instead based on a radical manipulation of the original 
text, other forms based on an “interpretive effort.”52 In such cases, technical expertise 
(in particular editing techniques) are used to analyze the semiotic strategies of the work 
and to suggest a close and critical reading in order to highlight the director’s choices, 
editing solutions, actors’ performances, and open a debate that involves fans, critics, and 
scholars. To the practices of genre remix analyzed by Tryon53 we could add the peculiar 
form of cinematic mashup dubbed by Peverini “slipshot movies.” A working mashup 
“linking two films on a narrative level, juxtaposing two scenes and using some fictional 
elements or props to build an intertextual bridge.”54 In this way, for example, a character 
can call on the phone another character, answering from another scene in another film 
with surreal and comic effects, breaking the coherence of a narrative world and sparking 
off a rereading game. This is a simple and effective technique to build intertextual nar -
rations. It is widely used on the Web in the Shipper’s Videos through which fans of the 
new American TV series hybridize together different TV series. Fans recut characters’ 
actions (for example from House  and CSI) in common narrative contexts as if they were 
a single narration, thus building a (false) aesthetic of continuity.55
The most common forms of filmic reworking and interpretive effort have been 
selected by Peverini56 based on the kind of operations made on the source film, from the 
161
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERSsimple selecting and sharing of scenes to the more challenging mashup. The results of 
these textual manipulations offer some interesting insights. Some operations redefine 
the content, with parodistic intention, while others completely change the form (the 
expression plane) without really transforming the content, as in reenacting and  
nonparodistic remakes. Peverini57 recalls the importance of considering the levels of 
professional and technical competence required by the remix operations, for example in 
so-called “kinetic typography,” where graphics totally substitute images.
The example of kinetic typography remix trailers is particularly interesting: This is a 
computer-aided animation technique with complex 2D and 3D movements of type let -
ters, initially used for film credits and Web home pages. In the remixed trailer of  The 
Dark Knight , for example, the sound track (music, dialog, sounds) is left untouched by 
“replacing the video track with sequences of words and sentences showing the narrative 
plane of the original text in an alternative fashion.”58 Taking another example, in the 
kinetic typography version of the Trainspotting  trailer, innovative rhythmic effects are 
created together with a sort of visual poetry animated by the contrast between the mov -
ing writing and the voice of the protagonist reciting his initial litany.
Manovich considers the moving graphic applied to typography as a sort of a new “met -
alanguage” that defines the new contemporary medial aesthetic.59 The complex textual 
hybrids promoted by this aesthetic present contents and techniques that mutually collide 
and transform their practices and meanings. For Manovich this is not merely a remixing , 
but a more general “deep remixability,” which is still uncommon now in the videos posted 
on the Web by amateurs, as it belongs to the supposed professionals of digital media crea -
tion. Thanks to postproduction software, digital composition, and computer graphics 
(like Flash, Adobe After Effects, Final Cut, Softimage XSI, Nuke), techniques that were 
once separate, like animation and 3D graphics, and music, are now reassembled in films 
and trailers in a global remix which transforms the textuality of these new cultural prod -
ucts both in terms of content as well as technically and stylistically.60
Conclusion
Sweded movies, launched by Gondry’s Be Kind Rewind , prompt fans to remix film con -
tent so as to represent them in a near-caricatural way, showing the power of “bottom-up 
practices” of reinterpretation.61 In their low-fi way and with an almost anonymous cir -
culation, sweded films fall within the contemporary aesthetic of postproduction.62
With regard to the new forms of remix and mashup of movies and trailers we have 
briefly outlined, can we still regard them as intrasemiotic translations? If we consider 
that they open up to the signification of source films (at the content level) with expan -
sions but also with reversals and elisions, we could answer the question affirmatively.
If instead we consider that, at the expression level,63 they do not just retrieve materials 
from a single film but mix or remix many different ones, hybridizing and turning them 
into something new, then we shift to the logics of remix and mashup. Logics which, in 
semiotic terms, are not exclusively associated with translation and interpretation, aim -
ing to create variants and variations, but also introduce alternatives and “invariants” 
linked to structural elements.64 If I change the sound track and the editing of a trailer in 
order to transform its dominant genre features, I will also be manipulating the overall 
meaning and textual taste perceived by the film spectator in sensory, affective, stylistic, 
and discursive terms. I will therefore change something that was an invariant, an essen -
tial component for the interpretation of the intentio operis65 of the film or the trailer, and 
162
N. M. DUSIchange it into a possible local variant. In other words, I’m building new invariants and 
deeply transforming meanings through a rewriting operation linked to a new (although 
short-lived) intentio lectoris .66
It would be more appropriate to think of these remixes and mashup trailers, and even fake 
trailers, in terms of reformulations or rewritings67 of the source texts. By hybridizing and 
transforming the dominant meanings of the latter, they use the logic of recognizability (rep -
etition of the same) typical of remake and intrasemiotic translation as a means of supporting 
a logic of transformative and innovative reinterpretation; a reinterpretation which, by work -
ing on the forms (connections) and the materials of film expression, but also by replacing 
them and inventing new ones, creates alternative meanings and tells other stories, with 
pragmatic purposes different from those of the traditional trailer. It transforms radically the 
semiotic status of the target text, the movie remix or the trailer remix with respect to films 
and trailers created by the entertainment industry.
Notes
 1 See Nicola Dusi, “Le forme del trailer come manipolazione intrasemiotica,” in Trailer, Spot, Clip, Siti, 
Banner: Le forme brevi della comunicazione audiovisiva , ed. Isabella Pezzini (Rome: Meltemi, 2002), 36–41. 
See Lisa Kernan, Coming Attractions: Reading American Movie Trailers (Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press, 2004), 6–8.
 2 Gérard Genette, Palimpsestes: La littérature au second degré  (Paris: Seuil, 1982).
 3 Robert Stam, Robert Burgoyne, and Sandy Flitterman-Lewis, New Vocabularies in Film Semiotics: 
Structuralism, Post-Structuralism and Beyond  (London: Routledge, 1992), 209–210.
 4 Algirdas Julien Greimas and Joseph Courtés, eds., Sémiotique: Dictionnaire raisonné de la théorie du langage  
(Paris: Hachette, 1979), 187–188.
 5 Umberto Eco, The Role of the Reader: Exploration in the Semiotics of Texts ( Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press , 1979) , 20–21.
 6 The “intralinguistic” translation process uses the same “matters” of the expression of the source text to 
create different forms of discourse and textual organization. See Roman Jakobson, “On linguistic aspects 
of translation,” in On Translation, ed. Robert A. Brower (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1959),  232. Louis Hjelmslev, Prolegomena to a Theory of Language (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1961), 52–53.
 7 See Isabella Pezzini, “Forme brevi, a intelligenza del resto,” in Trailer, Spot, Clip, Siti, Banner: Le forme 
brevi della comunicazione audiovisiva , ed. Isabella Pezzini (Rome: Meltemi, 2002), 9–10. Chuck Tryon , 
Reinventing Cinema. Movies in the Age of Media Convergence (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press, 2009), 149–154.
 8 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide  (New York: New York University 
Press, 2006), 1–24.
 9 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema, 155.
10 Lev Manovich, What Comes After Remix? (http://Manovich.net, 2007). Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making 
Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York: Penguin, 2008), 68–76.
11 Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, ed., Mashup Cultures (Wien: Springer, 2010), 8–10.
12 Henry Jenkins, “Multiculturalism, Appropriation, and the New Media Literacies: Remixing Moby Dick,” 
in Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss ( Wien: Springer, 2010), 107.
13 Manovich, What Comes After Remix? 3–4.
14 See Paolo Peverini, “Dal bastard pop al mash-up: Mutazioni in corso,” E/C 1 (2007): 115–116. Eduardo 
Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Cultures,” in Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan Sonvilla-
Weiss ( Wien: Springer, 2010), 157.
15 By Danny Boyle (UK, 1996).
16 By Curtis Hanson (USA, 2002).
17 By James Cameron (USA, 1997).
18 By Robert Blankenheim (2010), https://robertblankenheim.com (accessed April, 2014).
19 Navas defines as “reflexive” the mashup that claims autonomy and “challenges the ‘spectacular aura’ of 
the original.” See Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups.” 159.
163
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERS20 By Steven Spielberg (USA, 2002).
21 By Baz Luhrmann (USA, 1996).
22 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema,  149–150.
23 Paolo Peverini,  “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo. Soggetti, pratiche, testi,” in Open 
Cinema: Scenari di visione cinematografica negli anni ’10 , eds. Emiliana De Blasio and Paolo Peverini (Rome: 
Fondazione Ente dello Spettacolo, 2010), 31.
24 Peverini, “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo,”  32. Translated from the Italian by myself 
in collaboration with the author.
25 Nicola Dusi and Lucio Spaziante, eds., Remix-Remake: pratiche di replicabilità  (Rome: Meltemi, 2006), 11.
26 By Michel Gondry (USA, 2008).
27 It is still possible to watch many sweded movies on: http://swededfilms.com/films.html (accessed October, 
2013).
28 “The Shining—Sweded” http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2unsGNFdts (accessed April, 2014).
29 See Nicola Dusi, “Remaking as a Practice: Some Problems of Transmediality,”  Cinéma & Cie XII,  no. 18 
(2012): 124.
30 See Augusto Sainati, “Tati’s Jour de Fête, il colore progressivo: per una teoria del remake,” in  
Remix-Remake: pratiche di replicabilità, eds. Nicola Dusi and Lucio Spaziante (Rome: Meltemi, 2006), 
197–200.
31 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 150.
32 The Shining (Spoof Trailer) by Robert Ryang (2005), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ca7IHRdy7u4 
(accessed April, 2014).
33 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 150.
34 Jenkins, Convergence Culture , 93–168.
35 Manovich, “What Comes After Remix?” 3–4.
36 Peverini, “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo,” 34.
37 Ibid.,  35.
38 Jenkins, Convergence Culture , 1–24.
39 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 7.
40 As in the case of HBO and the online remix Seven Minute Sopranos , used to attract new audiences (Tryon, 
Reinventing Cinema,  160).
41 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 151–152.
42 Ibid., 152.
43 Ibid., 156.
44 Ang Lee (USA, 2005).
45 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 156.
46 Tryon states that “a high-concept film or film series is boiled down to (approximately) five seconds, thus 
exposing and playfully mocking the formulaic nature of many Hollywood films” ( Reinventing Cinema , 
156). “Compilation videos,” recalls  Tryon, could also present the best and worst movie scenes, and 
encompass a number of different approaches, that can even “include related scenes from multiple films 
and have been used to parody film culture in some way” (ibid.)
47 Tryon, Reinventing Cinema , 157. On the meta-discursive awareness of movie remix see Darren Tofts  and 
Christian McCrea, “What Now? The Imprecise and Disagreeable Aesthetics of Remix,” The Fibreculture 
Journal 15 (2009): 1–2.
48 According to Tryon ( Reinventing Cinema , 155): “whether that value comes from the advertising revenue 
accumulated by video sharing sites such as YouTube or from the attention directed toward the media texts 
featured in the parodies.”
49 Peverini,  “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo ,” 39–71.
50 By Christopher Nolan (USA, 2008).
51 Peverini, “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo ,” 36.
52 Ibid., 36–37.
53 Tryon,  Reinventing Cinema , 155–156.
54 Peverini, “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo ,” 66.
55 Lev Manovich, The  Language of New Media (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2001), 134–135.
56 Peverini, “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo ,” 34.
57 Ibid.
58 Ibid., 52.
59 Lev Manovich,  Software Takes Command (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013), 254–266.
164
N. M. DUSI60 According to Manovich ( Software Takes Command , 267–276) this is a “stylized” aesthetic, that would 
previously have been identified as cartoonish, which can be seen in movies such as The Matrix  trilogy by 
Wachowsky brothers (USA, 1999–2003); Sin City  by Robert Rodriguez (USA, 2005); 300 by Zack Snyder 
(USA, 2006).
61 Michel de Certeau, L’invention du quotidien. I Arts de faire  (Paris: Gallimard , 1990), 63–84. Or, rather, it 
is a case of “overinterpretation,” according to Umberto Eco, Interpretation and Overinterpretation  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 45–66.
62 Nicolas Bourriaud, Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay—How Art Reprograms the World  (New York: 
Lukas & Sternberg, 2002), 7–16.
63 “Matters of expression,” “matters of content,” and the idea of a dynamic “textual strategy” are terms of 
film semiotics. See Christian Metz, Language and Cinema (The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter,  1974) , 
208–211. Stam et al., New Vocabularies , 51.
64 The difference between invariants and variants in languages derives from structural linguistics (Hjelmslev, 
Prolegomena to a Theory of Language, 66 ): invariants are made by “commutation” (if changing an element 
of one of the two language planes changes the general meaning, then that is an invariant), while variants 
are made by the “replacing” of elements without variations in meaning.
65 Umberto Eco, The Limits of Interpretation  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990), 44–63.
66 Ibid., 45.
67 Roland  Barthes, S/Z (New York: Hill & Wang, 1974), 3–11.
Bibliography
Barthes, Roland. S/Z. New York: Hill & Wang, 1974.
Bourriaud, Nicolas. Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay—How Art Reprograms the World . New York: 
Lukas & Sternberg, 2002.
Certeau, Michel de. L’invention du quotidien. I Arts de faire . Paris: Gallimard, 1990.
Dusi, Nicola. “ Le forme del trailer come manipolazione intrasemiotica .” In Trailer, Spot, Clip, Siti, 
Banner: Le forme brevi della comunicazione audiovisiva , edited by Isabella Pezzini, 31–66. Rome: 
Meltemi, 2002 (available on www.ec-aiss.it/biblioteca).
——. “Remaking as a Practice: Some Problems of Transmediality.”  Cinéma & Cie  XII, no. 18 (2012): 
115–127.
Dusi, Nicola and Lucio Spaziante, Eds. Remix-Remake: pratiche di replicabilità . Rome: Meltemi, 2006.
Eco, Umberto. The Role of the Reader: Exploration in the Semiotics of Texts . Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1979.
——. The Limits of Interpretation . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
——. Interpretation and Overinterpretation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Genette, Gérard. Palimpsestes. La littérature au second degré . Paris: Seuil, 1982.
Greimas, Algirdas Julien and Joseph Courtés, Eds. Sémiotique. Dictionnaire raisonné de la théorie du 
langage . Paris: Hachette, 1979.
Hjelmslev, Louis.  Prolegomena to a Theory of Language . Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 
1961 (or. ed. 1943).
Jakobson, Roman. “On linguistic aspects of translation.” In On Translation , edited by Robert A. Brower, 
232–239, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York 
University Press, 2006.
——. “Multiculturalism, Appropriation, and the New Media Literacies: Remixing Moby Dick.” In Mashup 
Cultures , edited by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 98–119, Wien: Springer, 2010.
Kernan, Lisa. Coming Attractions: Reading American Movie Trailers. Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press, 2004.
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin, 
2008.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
——.  “What Comes After Remix?” http://Manovich.net, 2007 (now in Manovich 2013).
165
REMIXING MOVIES AND TRAILERS——.  “Software Takes Command.” http://lab.softwarestudies.com, 2008 (now in Manovich 2013).
——.  Software Takes Command . London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013.
Metz, Christian. Language and Cinema . The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter, 1974 (or. ed. 1971).
Navas, Eduardo. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Cultures.” In Mashup Cultures , edited 
by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 98–119, Wien: Springer, 2010.
Odin, Roger. De la Fiction. Bruxelles : De Boeke, 2000.
Peverini, Paolo. “Dal bastard pop al mash-up. Mutazioni in corso .” E/C 1 (2007): 115–120. 
——.  “La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo. Soggetti, pratiche, testi.”  In Open Cinema. 
Scenari di visione cinematografica negli anni ’ 10, edited by Emiliana De Blasio and Paolo Peverini, 
17–72. Rome: Fondazione Ente dello Spettacolo , 2010.
Pezzini, Isabella. “ Forme brevi, a intelligenza del resto .” In Trailer, Spot, Clip, Siti, Banner: Le forme brevi 
della comunicazione audiovisiva , edited by Isabella Pezzini, 9–29. Rome: Meltemi , 2002.
Sainati, Augusto. “Tati’s Jour de Fête, il colore progressivo: per una teoria del remake .” In Remix-
Remake: pratiche di replicabilità , edited by Nicola Dusi and Lucio Spaziante , 197–208. Rome: 
Meltemi , 2006.
Sonvilla-Weiss, Stefan, Ed. Mashup Cultures . Wien: Springer, 2010.
Stam, Robert, Robert Burgoyne, and Sandy Flitterman-Lewis. New Vocabularies in Film Semiotics: 
Structuralism, Post-Structuralism and Beyond . London: Routledge, 1992.
Tofts, Darren and Christian McCrea. “What Now? The Imprecise and Disagreeable Aesthetics of 
Remix.” The Fibreculture Journal  15 (2009): 1–11.
Tryon, Chuck. Reinventing Cinema: Movies in the Age of Media Convergence.  New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 2009.
16611
REMIXING THE  
PLAGUE OF IMAGES
Video Art from Latin America in a 
Transnational Context
Erandy Vergara
There has been a strong production of video art in Latin American countries in the last 
four decades, and an equally strong tradition of appropriation and remixing prerecorded 
materials, particularly images from popular culture.1 Remix in video art encompasses 
reusing, recycling, referencing, and redirecting audiovisual materials toward orientations 
distinct from the original source. Since the raw materials of many video remixes include 
imagery that comes from advertising, cinema, magazines, and television, apart from for -
mal experimentation, critiques to those systems of representation are common and bold. 
The aim of numerous artists is to reevaluate the elements constituting visual culture and 
to articulate resistance to hegemonic images and discourses in a transnational context.
In contemporary video art from Latin America there is a significant body of work 
dealing with questions of memory mixing past and present.2 Other pieces connected to 
the lineage of the avant-garde in Latin America explore questions of modernity through 
citations and remix.3 This chapter focuses on four videos deploying remix strategies as 
metacommentaries on remix itself.4 As I will explain, such works cannot be separated 
from the troubling genesis of the source materials and the wider context of circulation 
and reception, yet at the same time they function on various levels as self-reflexive cases 
of the practice of remix.
To be concrete in my argument, I will focus on four case studies which use remix to 
revise the smooth flowing or the unsteady flickering of the plague of images circulating 
online and offline on a daily basis.5 There is the bitter criticism of transnational capital -
ism and diverse forms of invasion in Ximena Cuevas’s Cinepolis  (2003); the appropria -
tion of images about protection and surveillance in Graciela Fuentes’s To Protect  (2003); 
the re-vision of 15 years of Colombian television in José Alejandro Restrepo’s Viacrucis  
(2004); and the scratching of a speech by Fidel Castro in José Toirac’s Opus  (2005). 
Despite their differences, these artists complicate remix as a contemporary aesthetic in 
167
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGESworks privileging contrast and noise to draw attention to the smoothness and/or frag -
mentation of mainstream media, to reorient the reading of known sounds and images, 
as well as to expose the relationship between the appropriated elements and what Slavoj 
Žižek calls the “material traces of ideology.”6
The Wider Context of Remix: Zapping, Swiping, and Scratching
In his Máquina e imaginário: o desafio das poéticas tecnológicas , media scholar Arlindo 
Machado inserts the zapping effect in the timeline of what he calls the “poetics of 
remake,” a strategy he situates in relation to avant-garde tendencies to reuse materials 
produced and circulated through mechanical reproduction. Machado links zapping  and 
zipping  to the scratching  of music and audiovisual material, thereby calling attention to 
a common thread: users of technologies such as remote controls and VCRs also fragment 
and rearrange pieces of information.7 Now with computers and smart phones more cuts 
can be implemented in the act of swiping, and thus the fragmented reading that 
Machado traced in zapping and zipping finds yet another vein in computer culture “to 
crossing spaces and times, and different levels of reality, waving the bandwidths, and 
shuffling formats and terrains.”8
At the level of perception actions such as zapping and swiping result in more frag -
mented reception and hyperattention. N. Katherine Hayles provides insight. In How 
We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis , she advances two forms of 
fragmented reading and perception. On the one hand, hyper-reading is “a strategic 
response to an information-intensive environment, aimed to conserve attention by 
quickly identifying relevant information, so that only relatively few points of a given 
text are actually read.”9 On the other hand, hyper-reading is related to hyperattention, 
“a cognitive mode that has low threshold for boredom, alternates flexibly between 
different information streams, and prefers a high level of stimulation.”10 While eco -
nomic, political, social, cultural, and racial differences make it impossible to assume 
that all users who zip, zap, and swipe have a shorter span of attention, it is important 
to bear in mind that these forms of reception often create a “state of disorder” which 
determines the fact that contemporary users are familiarized with an aesthetics of 
fragmentation as in remix. Here is where more “conscious practices” such as scratching  
become relevant.11
While zapping and swiping generate ruptures and fragmentation, these actions do not 
involve a critical rearticulation of the material; the zap and the swipe involve acts of 
reading, while the scratch involves a process of reinscription or disruption of the mate -
rial. Hence, the works by scratchers and video artists—particularly self-reflective 
pieces—dissect images, texts, and sounds but at the same time, they critically engage 
with the very practice of cutting, pasting, scratching, and remixing. Although the prac -
titioners of scratch video separated themselves from video artists deploying scratching 
strategies there are two common threads: (1) the literal or symbolic distortion of preex -
isting elements; (2) the materials and subject of critique are above all advertising, televi -
sion programming, broadcasting corporations, politicians, and capitalism. In general 
terms video scratchers and video artists fragment the flow of images as spectators do 
when zapping or swiping, but in the process of recomposition they scratch the source to 
appeal to the spectator’s imagination and to establish others affective, critical, historical, 
and political associations.
168
E. VERGARAAt the same time, zappers, swipers, and scratchers are also embedded in an aesthetics 
of continuity as in mainstream cinema. For example, computer-generated characters and 
locations blend perfectly with live actors in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings . What 
sustains this aesthetics is the contrast-free transition of elements all placed next to each 
other as if belonging to a seamless world without gaps.
The apparent contradictions between fragmentation and continuity actually coexist, 
offering a series of ironies that pose a central question: how can contemporary artists use 
remix to resist the hegemonic discourses that at times would seem to flicker disturbingly 
in mass media and at other times would seem to flow smoothly? The case studies dis -
cussed henceforth target both: while some artists from Latin America challenge linear 
histories and continuity, others aim to expose the gaps. In general, they endeavor to 
redirect the material toward a critical filter by relying on the zapping effect, by overex -
posing already overexposed footage, but also by concealing, by slowing down and sus -
pending in time some of the elements they draw from the plague of images.12
José Alejandro Restrepo: A Love Story between  
Religion and Television in Colombia
José Alejandro Restrepo is one of the pioneers of single channel video and video instal -
lation in Colombia. Since 1988 he has created more than 20 years of Colombian mass 
media, cutting and pasting pieces of documentaries, newscasts, and television programs 
to introduce disorder into the hegemonic order of history, culture, politics, and society. 
For Restrepo there is no need to produce new images, but rather to create symbolic 
distortions and interventions on the existing ones and in that sense his cuts and scratches 
are more than “purely video-graphic” concerns; they foreground hegemonic narratives 
and systems of practices and sensibilities that support and reproduce mass media 
messages.13
Alluding to the 14 Stations of the Cross which recount the history of Christ from the 
moment he is condemned to death to his crucifixion, Restrepo constructs a disturbing 
history of suffering in contemporary Colombia. Viacrucis, Stations of the Cross  (2004) is a 
19 minute 30 second video depicting archival material saturated with scenes of human 
suffering, torture, and violence. For example, a segment courtesy of Colombian newscast 
Uninoticias shows the aftermath of a Holy Thursday in Bogotá, where diverse police 
squads spread out and beat a confused crowd. While the news anchor explains the context 
of the riot a woman is heard crying: “They are killing us!” Another segment shows a crowd 
beating a humiliated man in a cloth codpiece with a sign identifying him as a thief; the 
beating, it seems, is justified. The suffering continues in another scene showing a man 
about to shoot himself in the head while he cries for his mother. Drama is also embedded 
on the scenes of Pablo Escobar’s funeral depicting a police squad’s vain attempt to control 
the crowd as they shout “Pablo! Pablo!” while they try to reach the open coffin of the 
Colombian drug lord. More of Colombia’s drugs-related news: “Canadian customs agents 
discover a statue of baby Jesus stuffed with cocaine!” “Drama and human misery overflow 
these scenes!” The resemblance of these images to Catholic imagery could easily escape 
the attention of a distracted viewer or a zapper, and yet by cutting and pasting them 
together Restrepo aims to draw the viewer’s attention back to it.
Restrepo’s remix is a kind of historical zapping of 15 years of Colombian television 
bringing forth its religious ties. Viacrucis  resembles channel surfing performed by a zap -
per, except that in this case “changing channels” becomes a conceptual tool to expose 
169
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGESthe continuous flow of images sadly characterized by similarity. Simultaneously, this 
video exposes how infamous acts are normalized the minute they are aired. Suffering, 
sacrifice—there is no difference through the television screen, and in fact the condition 
for gaining 15 minutes of fame seems to depend on assimilating an event as “holy,” as 
Cuauhtémoc Medina has put it.14 Yet Restrepo does more than zapping. His desire to 
carefully examine the images daily flickering on the TV monitor implies “mobilizing the 
archive” in order to articulate a kind of visual grammar.15 Viacrucis  and other works by 
this Colombian artist thus engage in what Hal Foster describes as the “archival impulse” 
which deals with physical archival material calling for human interpretation or reinter -
pretation.16 But his appropriation and remixing of television images is a creative and also 
a “political act of re-interpretation” and reordering of history , retrieving images from the 
near past to rethink the complex entanglement of past, present, and future while under -
lying the ideological affiliations of the original source.17 Restrepo cuts fragments to tell 
another story that begins by bringing back the zap and playing the same images of suf -
fering once more but at a different rhythm, where the Catholic symbols can be heard 
aloud.
Finally, the mise-en-scène  of human misery in television is formed by short pieces that 
last a few seconds or are repeated; Restrepo recycles them to look at them carefully in a 
context where the original order is broken down into smaller samples that he brings 
under the microscope. The same images reinforcing justified, almost natural, suffering 
tied to Catholicism can be used to symbolically scratch their authority. Viacrucis’s mul -
tiple stages do flow like the 14 Stations of the Cross, the pieces fit, but as seen in 
Restrepo’s remix they do not lead to salvation. By mobilizing the archive of Colombian 
television, Viacrucis brings the zapper’s attention back to the uniformity within the 
variety of channels.
A Tale of Invasion, by Ximena Cuevas
For almost three decades Mexican artist Ximena Cuevas has combined deeply personal 
images and stories with fragments of films, television programs and commercials, maga -
zine clippings, and cut-up songs to explore, among other subjects, gender and sexuality, 
fiction and reality, and the ongoing construction and negotiation of Mexican culture 
and society.
Figure 11.1   Stills from Viacrucis (Viacrucis, Stations of the Cross ) José Alejandro Restrepo, 
2004, 00:19:30, Colombia, B&W and Color (courtesy of the artist)

170
E. VERGARADuring the time the United States invaded Iraq in 2003 and discourses of invasion 
materialized in complex ways, Cuevas produced Cinepolis, the Capital of Cinema  (Cinepolis, 
La Capital Del Cine ). The title of the work draws from the name and slogan of a Mexican 
movie theater chain, while the video presents a mix of images associated with cultural, 
economic, political, and symbolic forms of invasions. In the edition Cuevas plays with 
audio and visual layers, scratching, slowing down, and playing back some fragments repeat -
edly as in zapping. Sounds and images, however, are intervened and interspersed with 
footage of diverse forms of spectatorships. The constant thread is invasion and yet through 
scratching and remixing the 22-minute video stretches this concept. Although the project 
begins with images of the Coca-Cola parade in Mexico City and clippings of some key 
landmark of the city are inserted throughout, the locus of the intrusion is blurry. For exam -
ple, a segment of a black and white Mexican film shows a group of men talking about a 
recent meeting where scientists came to the conclusion “that the __ _ invasion has most 
definitely begun,” but Cuevas uses a censor beep sound and the grammatical symbol “_” 
to conceal the invaders’ identity. As the video runs it reveals complex layers of everyday 
invasion and coexistence of local and imported goods from Mexico and the United States, 
while the tensions are more explicit on some fragments. For example, behind the scenes 
of a McDonald’s commercial, representing the ultimate symbols of transitional capitalism 
and Americanization, Cuevas clandestinely recorded a makeup artist for food preparing 
the burger for the shooting.18 As she was holding the camera she “encountered” a rather 
controversial shot: popular singer Pedro Fernández in charro costume sits on a McDonalds 
restaurant while he receives directions from a male director who sexualizes the burger to 
spice up the shoot: “You are finally mine!  . . . You are so good, oh, so tasty. So good, oh, so 
tasty,” says the man offscreen. The scene is repeated a few times until the director pro -
nounces the final “cut.” Fernández then spits out pieces of the hamburger he had previ -
ously bitten with pleasure on a McDonald’s bag. This part of the video brings to the fore 
a vast array of complex associations with regards to gender, transnational capitalism, and 
so forth, however one theme particularly resonates with my discussion of remix. The way 
in which Cuevas’s fragment untangles the contrasting elements  that in the original ad 
appears to blend seamlessly. Here I draw from a point recently made by scholar Laura 
Gutiérrez in order to connect it to other parts of Cinepolis  that I discuss below. As 
McDonalds threatened Cuevas with a lawsuit, and the video had to be removed from 
public screenings in Mexico, Gutiérrez explains that:
what concerned the television production company executives was not the 
tainted image that the actor singer Pedro Fernández might have acquired because 
of this “negative” exposure, but the complex web of signification that they were 
trying to link in one single moving image: McDonalds’s product consumption and 
mexicanidad , or even, latinidad19
Since the commercial was for a major Spanish-language broadcast network aimed at 
Latino groups in the United States, the single and coherent image that Univision sought 
to portray is distorted in Cuevas’s Cinepolis  for the charro—that symbol to which all 
Latinos are supposed to identify with—does not identify with the food. By using remix 
strategies, by cutting, scratching, and layering pieces of popular culture Cuevas untan -
gles the “complex web of signification” that mass media aims to connect seamlessly.
This is also the case in another fragment of appropriated images of Big Brother 
Mexico, as TV host Adela Micha explains that the conflicts among the guests are a 
171
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGESclear example of personal interests, particularly “the kind of interest that you pay on 
a high price.” She continues to reflect: “That is just one tiny cell inside the Big 
Brother house, which in fact might reflect what is happening in the world tonight. By 
the way, this was President George Bush’s message to the world.” Micha then reads the 
speech she holds in her hands: “The initial phases of defending the world from a great 
danger have begun. And my commitment is that every effort will be made to protect 
innocent civilians.” As she finishes reading, the host looks back toward the camera 
and says “And our commitment in Televisa is to always keep you well informed and 
entertained.” Cut: TV commercial where young men and women dance to tropical 
music. Those kinds of disturbing ruptures running in only one minute of a TV program 
are Cuevas’s source of action. Without any zap the fragments flowing smoothly on the 
screen pose critical differences: How is Bush’s mission similar to a broadcast company’s 
mission to entertain? Or how can the “tiny cell” of Big Brother reflect US president’s 
discourse on military operations in Iraq? Can we dance after Bush’s speech? By bring -
ing this fragment to a larger process of conceptual and literal scratching of narratives 
of invasion, Cuevas exposes the fine layers and subtexts forming these images, and in 
so doing she challenges the continuity and flattening of the original source ( Figure  
11.2).
But why is it relevant to challenge continuity at the aesthetic and symbolic levels? 
Numerous scholars have called attention to how digital technologies support an  
aesthetics of continuity, the seamless blending of contrasting and sometimes troubling 
differences. Lev Manovich, for instance, identifies a difference between the 1980s post -
modern aesthetics and the 1990s logic of computer-based compositing: in the former 
“historical references and media quotes are maintained as distinct elements,” while in 
the latter continuity and smoothness predominate. Thus, the traditional cut of montage 
has been replaced in computer-based media with no cuts.20 In this context, Manovich 
and other scholars have argued for the need of “precariousness,” “cuts,” “opalescence,” 
among other concepts to counter the seamless continuity of mass media.21 Cinepolis  
deploys cuts, scratches, and juxtapositions to confront the flatness of different formats, 
media, and realities, and to expose the associational lines of invasion. Further, her cuts 
are inscribed in the very materials she uses, she overwrites on the Coca-Cola parade, on 
Big Brother, on films and video clips, to generate a critical order out of the “state of 
disorder” so familiar to zappers and swipers.
Figure 11.2   Stills from Cinepolis, La Capital Del Cine (Cinepolis, the Film Capital ) Ximena 
Cuevas, 2003, 00:22:18 Mexico, B&W and Color (courtesy of the artist)

172
E. VERGARAGraciela Fuentes: To Protect ?
The relationship between discourses of surveillance and protection is investigated by 
Mexican-born New-York-based artist Graciela Fuentes’s remix, To Protect  (2003). By 
superimposing political speeches about protection and a movie partially encoded against 
illegal reproduction, the artwork scratches sound and images to such an extent that the 
noise obscures an intelligible image.
One of the layers consists of videos appropriated from mass media where different 
public figures such as George Bush and Dick Cheney speak about protection between 
2001 and 2002. Another layer features fragments of Peter Jackson’s 1994 Heavenly 
Creatures .22 The film’s scenes and characters, however, are unrecognizable given the 
encoding that the distribution company used to prevent piracy. Instead, a texture resem -
bling a multilayered chainlike fabric render the moving image a mosaic of textures that 
keep changing as the film runs, and as it is mixed with images of US politicians. In her 
remix Fuentes turned the protection of the film into a discursive tool, inverting the 
protection against itself. On the other hand, Fuentes accentuates an aesthetics of inter -
woven video signals by pixelating the images, so that the finest details are lost in the 
larger picture. In addition, Fuentes manipulates the video’s tonalities with a green filter 
in order to make a connection to night vision devices used for protection. The juxtaposi -
tion of layers of video in a single image converges in abstract, pixelated, and sped up 
images of protection.
The audio, on the contrary runs slowly. It consists of the mashup of different audio 
tracks that cannot be discerned individually, in much the same way as the images. 
Speeches by George Bush, Dick Cheney, and Colin Powell mix with Heavenly Creatures ’ 
soundtrack; these two sources of sound change in accordance to segments of video, 
however only one track is consistent throughout the five-minute duration of the video 
piece: the voice of George Bush in his post-9/11 speech, specifically as he states the 
phrase “to protect the American people.” In Fuentes’s work, only five words of this glob -
ally broadcasted speech have been stretched, thus creating an unrecognizable sound 
track that in the process of editing has lost any meaning. In contrast with the flickering 
sequencing of images, Bush’s phrase sounds like an extreme-slow-scratching of a vinyl 
record performed by a DJ over five minutes. The low frequency resulting from stretching 
Bush’s phrase sounds calm and guttural, and the vibrations and resonances are almost 
like a meditation soundtrack, a monk chant, or a long-lasting and distant “hum.”
Figure 11.3   Stills from To Protect , Graciela Fuentes, 2003, 00:05:30, Mexico/USA, color 
(courtesy of the artist)

173
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGESHowever, both audio and video prevent a clear identification of the source materials, 
thus To Protect also proposes a critique of the circulation and consumption of images in 
mass media. Fuentes describes her editing as “frenetic and sped up” which according to 
her “mimics the way televised media attempts to arouse and anesthetize the audience’s 
attention with fragmented information.”23 These fragments and zaps, which are part of 
our daily life as discussed earlier, are repeated in Fuentes’s mix, but unlike images on the 
newscasts, her mix obstructs a clear vision in order to invite viewers to see beyond the 
first layer: the realistic representation on the television screen. To Protect ’s images are 
pixelated and confusing, they result from a mix which does not blend the differences 
into a coherent whole. The sequences appropriated by the artist are cut to last only a 
few seconds as in zapping, but they are also fragmented within the frames so that recog -
nized politicians and Hollywood stars are reduced to ambiguous fragments of bodies and 
faces that keep changing as though the image is transformed before it can be understood. 
Further, the protected images of Melanie Lynskey, Kate Winslet, and other cast members 
of Heavenly Creatures  mix with images of Bush and other key members of his administra -
tion. Hence To Protect  mixes fiction and reality, blending them in the timeline of a short 
prewar history that tells itself as the images pass by.
In that sense To Protect  aligns with the tradition of scratch video to critically target 
politicians and mass media. In fact, Fuentes’s use of the speeches that circulated world -
wide during 2001–02 silences the politicians. This might appear as an act of resistance 
to media overexposure of the September 11 attacks and the subsequent series of events 
flooding the media stream at a global scale. To that saturation and fragmentation Fuentes 
responded with a porous image suspended in its own formation. Unlike Restrepo and 
Cuevas who still retrieve some clear fragments and images, Fuentes’s scratches go deeper, 
turning the material indiscernible. Her five-minute video piece frustrates an affirmative 
view of faces, words, stories, or something recognizable for the spectator, who is left in a 
state of expectation. But to say that To Protect  targets a merely interpretative rearticula -
tion of the source material conceals precisely the political roots of scratching to chal -
lenge the power of images.
The Last Composition: Jose Toirac’s Opus
For many years Cuban artist José Toirac has drawn on strategies such as clipping, cutting, 
copying, pasting, and quoting material and imagery he appropriates from mass media and 
popular culture. In his 2005 Opus , Toirac appropriates Castro’s inaugural discourse of the 
2003–04 academic year at the Havana’s Revolution Square (Plaza de la Revolución).
Through the editing process the artist cuts all the numbers pronounced by Castro, 
pasting them one after the other. Starting with a black screen and the title of the work 
in white font, the video runs in loop and Castro’s voice speaks nothing else but numbers: 
779; 10,000; 100,000; 4; 1,000; 100,000; 400,000; 2 and so on. Toirac relies on the view -
ers’ recognition of the original source’s history; the high-pitched voice of Fidel Castro 
transformed into a scratch that exposes rather than conceals the artist’s manipulation of 
the material. At times the audio recording appears to cut off and the numbers are clearly 
separated from the preceding and following words; the context of enunciation that argu -
ably conveys meaning to the overall speech. Thus, Toirac’s action of cutting Castro’s 
words is conspicuously audible. In fact, it is not clear whether the cutting and pasting 
follows the original order in which the numbers were stated or whether the succession 
is at random. For example, on a fragment of the video Castro states “thirty” seven 
174
E. VERGARAcontinuous times, but his voice sounds different on each utterance; at times it is clear 
and strong while at other times the same number sounds rough and harsh. Also, on a 
long series the number “one” is inserted between other digits: 1; 42.23; 1; 53.6; 1; 54.7; 
1; 55.4; 1; 62.7; 1; 64.6, 1; 66, and so on, exposing Toirac as the author of Castro’s speech 
recomposition, which sometimes literally sounds like a scratch ( Figure 11.4 ).
Toirac’s intervention of Castro’s speech plays with the instability of the source mate -
rial and the truth behind the statistics. Since Castro’s words appear cut off, how can we 
know whether the artist broke large numbers to form smaller ones or not? Did Castro 
really say all those numbers—together they make nearly five minutes of one single 
speech? How long was the original speech? What else did Castro say? Did he say any -
thing at all? Cut off from the original source, each number conveys interrogations 
exceeding the original source. First, there is no context of enunciation. While Castro’s 
voice is recognizable he could have been anywhere, not necessarily in Cuba. Second, as 
presented in Toirac’s remix, Castro’s speech resembles the speech of any politician; 11; 
12; 13; 1; 150; 81.169; 100; 44.790; the same numbers could have been said by Bush, 
Chavez, Chirac, anyone ruling at the time the video was made, before, or afterwards. 
This is also because Castro’s voice is removed from his body and from his image on the 
media. Instead of a medium shot or a close-up of Castro in green army uniform speaking 
to the masses, and pointing his finger next to a set of microphones, Toirac’s only uses 
numbers enunciated strongly, or harshly, or weakly, or raspingly. Lastly there are the 
white numbers fading in and out on the black screen; they are slightly positioned toward 
the right side of the screen, and from right to left each number morphs into the next 
one, so for instance 25 turns into 28, which then turns into 30, and so forth. In these 
ways, Toirac’s composition oscillates between absence and presence, and in the continu -
ous morphing the absences reveal much more than Castro’s speech in itself. Toirac 
removes the source material from its context, cutting off the content and emptying its 
meaning. By meticulously cutting and pasting just the numbers that Castro pronounced, 
he literally scratches the original discourse and pulverizes its very substance, the statis -
tics. Without the mythical and controversial figure of Castro, his numbers convey 
Figure 11.4   The scratching of a speech by Fidel Castro made visible in José Toirac’s 
Opus (2005) (courtesy of the artist)
175
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGESnothing about the experience of the people they supposedly represent. In addition, this 
conceptual video demonstrates how deeply artists can comment upon the culture in 
which they live by using preexisting material. Toirac creates a new composition of 
Castro’s speech where the formal cut of a series of similar elements contradicts the 
whole, leaving nothing but a black screen.
Conclusions
The four case studies discussed above show different ways in which contemporary artists 
from Latin America use remix to aesthetically and symbolically scratch popular culture 
to resist hegemonic discourses that at times overlap and at other times are not coalesced 
in mass media. Each case reflects a different pole of remix, from the zapping of channels 
to the scratch of the smallest components. Most certainly Restrepo, Cuevas, Fuentes, 
and Toirac share a common concern with the images, ideologies, and the context of 
circulation and consumption of popular culture, yet on further examination they recog -
nize the potential of extracting pieces from the media stream to reorient the way the 
audience relates to them. What are those images, what do they want, and what do we 
do with them apart from glancing at them in different formats? Three of the four pieces 
discussed in this essay were inspired by the 9/11 media overexposure, a major example 
of the common stock we share in a transnational context, which functions as overarch -
ing framework to reflect on other themes: religion, invasion, protection. But all four 
cases critically situate the politics of the time, a pre-YouTube era that prepared us for 
practices of video sharing and social media platforms in which the plague of images 
spread, reaching “viral” scales. As different as the aesthetic and conceptual deployment 
of remix strategies by each piece were, they responded to the state of disorder and frag -
mentation at the core of practices such as zapping, scratching, and swiping with recom -
positions involving interpretative but particularly material inscriptions and scratches on 
precisely that plague of images we cannot eliminate. Restrepo’s zapping exposes the 
infinite variety of similar images of suffering. Cuevas accentuates the already existing 
ruptures offering decomposed pieces of invasion and capitalism. On the other hand, 
Fuentes and Toirac obstruct the visibility of overexposed public figures and discourses, 
scratching the material to the smallest components: pixels, textures, numbers, a blank 
screen. Together, these works form a small sample of remix from Latin America, which 
brings forth local and global issues interwoven on the threads of visual culture. By 
scratching bodies, pixels, textures, and discourses, these artists aim to bring back the 
attention of the zapper, the swiper and other scratchers, as well as to critically reflect on 
the meaning of scratching, for the properties are never granted but rather investigated 
and instigated; the scratch helps an artist begin to imagine, to interrogate, to resist, to 
filter, to debunk, to reorient.
Notes
 1 Remix strategies have been used by video artists since early experiments with film, TV monitors, and 
video. Pioneering investigations in Latin America date back to the late 1960s and 1970s in Argentina, 
Chile, Brazil, and Mexico. For more information on video art from Latin America see: Laura Baigorri, ed. 
Video en Latioamérica. Una historia crítica (Madrid: Brumaria, 2008); and Roberto Moreira Cruz, ed. 
Visionários: Audiovisual na América Latina  (São Paulo: Itaucultural, 2008).
 2 For example, Chilean Claudia Aravena articulates a critical act of memory by juxtaposing images of the 
Chilean coup of September 11, 1973, and footage of the September 11, 2001 attacks in the US. Other 
176
E. VERGARAartists dealing with issues of memory include Guillermo Cifuentes, Edgar Endress, Sandra De Berduccy, 
Lotty Rosenfeld, Graciela Taquini, and Carlos Trilnick, among others.
 3 The work of Venezuelan Alexander Apóstol is a case in point. In Documentary  (2005), appropriated 
documentaries about modern architecture in Venezuela clash with the underdeveloped private space of 
a construction worker who watches television with his family.
 4 Some recent examples include Mauricio Lupini’s samba karaoke Repeat After Reading (Sa Ba Da Ba) 
(2011); Jonathan Harker and Donna Conlon’s Drinking Song  (2011); and Alberto Lastreto’s El Prócer  
(2008). In addition there are the metacommentaries on remix and issues of copyright in Alfredo 
Salomón’s No D.R.  (1999) and Los Rights  (2002).
 5 The title of this essay functions as a quotation of Slavoj Žižek’s The Plague of Fantasies  (London: Verso, 
2008). I use the notion of “plague” to refer to the epidemic condition of visual materials, to the excess as 
well as the widespread circulation of images which are advertised, downloaded, shared, remixed, posted, 
and so forth.
 6 Ibid., 4. This term can be best explained with an example provided by Žižek. According to him the colos -
sal figures of an ideal man or a couple installed on top of workplaces and offices during the 1930s’ archi -
tectural projects of the Soviet Union rendered these public buildings mere pedestals to Stalin’s ideology. 
Ironically, Žižek argues, despite the fact that the monument stood for “an ideological monster which 
crushes actual living men under his feet,” the discourse underneath the design could not have been stated 
literally, although it was intrinsic to the architecture. This materialization of ideology in a concrete object 
is for him crucial, for it reveals the antagonisms that the explicit ideological formulation could not rec -
ognize. I propose that the profound connections between cultural production and ideology that Žižek 
summarizes in the aforementioned lines are at the core of the remix by Ximena Cuevas, Graciela Fuentes, 
José Alejandro Restrepo, and José Toirac.
 7 Zapping is the act of channel surfing performed by any television spectator with a remote control, though 
according to Machado we also perform zapping when listening to the radio as we drive. Zipping describes 
the act of fast-forwarding a videotape to avoid commercials on a recorded show. Scratching  refers to the 
manual operation of prerecorded materials that leads to its distortion. Arlindo Machado, “O efeito 
Zapping” in Máquina e imaginário: o desafio das poéticas tecnológicas  (São Paulo: EDUSP , 1996) 143–164. 
Unless otherwise noted, all translations are my own.
 8 Ibid., 144.
 9 N. Katherine Hayles, How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis (Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2012), 12.
10 Ibid.
11 Scratch video consists of recycled images from broadcasting television that are distorted and reedited 
through different technical and aesthetics means, but unlike scratching in music, the manipulation of 
materials does not include the manual operation of scratching the vinyl disc. Machado, “O efeito 
Zapping,”  143–164.
12 My use of the term “art  from  Latin America” draws from Gerardo Mosquera. In order to emphasize a 
discursive dimension over a geographical location or homogeneous identity, Mosqueta’s use of the prepo -
sition “from” aims for a subjective, political, and theoretical position rather than representing a particu -
lar context or place. Gerardo Mosquera, Caminar con el diablo: textos sobre arte, internacionalización y 
culturas  (Madrid: Exit, 2010).
13 José Restrepo, Interview by María A. Iovino, in Contratextos  (Bogotá: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, 
2008), 104.
14 Cuauhtémoc Medina, “De la encarnación como dominio,” in 3 Perspectivas: Exposición del Programa de 
Comisiones CIFO 2007 , ed. María Belén Sáez de Ibarra and José Alejandro Restrepo (Bogotá: Universidad 
Nacional de Colombia, 2011), 67–72.
15 José Alejandro Restrepo, Interview by Diego Garzón, Casa Daros, Río, 2013. Last modified June 3, 2013. 
http://vimeo.com/67562953 (accessed August 9, 2014).
16 Hal Foster, “An Archival Impulse,” in October  110 (Fall 2004) 21.
17 José Alejandro Restrepo, Interview by María A. Iovino, in Contratextos , 104.
18 Cuevas recorded the segment of the McDonalds commercial while working for a production company. 
The fragment lasting 1:33 of a total of 22:18 provoked the rage of both McDonalds’s executives and the 
production company, they threatened Cuevas with a lawsuit as she reveals in her video: Someone Behind 
the Door  (2005).
19 Laura Gutiérrez, “Ximena Cuevas’s Critical Collages,” in Performing Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras 
on the Transnational Stage  (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2010) 165.
177
REMIXING THE PLAGUE OF IMAGES20 Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), 143.
21 For a discussion of the concept of “precariousness” see: Christine Ross, “Introduction,” Precarious 
Visualities: New Perspectives on Identification in Contemporary Art and Visual Culture , eds. Olivier Asselin, 
Johanne Lamoureux, and Christine Ross (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2008). A recent 
formulation on the “cut” can be found at Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska, Life After New Media: 
Mediation as a Vital Process  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012). With regard to “opalescence” see 
Margaret Morse, “Nature Morte: Landscape and Narrative in Virtual Environments,” in Immersed in 
Technology: Art and Virtual Environments , eds. Mary Anne Moser and Douglas MacLeod (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1996), 195–232.
22 Fuentes also plays with the associations that the film might have with the concepts of protection and 
reality. For her, Heavenly Creatures  complicates the mix because the film is based on a book, which at the 
same time it is supposedly based on facts: two obsessed teenagers decide to commit an act of extreme 
violence in a moment where according to Fuentes they are “completely disconnected from reality.” In the 
film, the violence is secondary, and yet Fuentes does not suggest a literal connection between military 
politics in the US and the film’s fiction. Fuentes, Graciela. E-mail to the author, August 8, 2013.
23 Graciela Fuentes, To Protect , directed by Graciela Fuentes (New York: 2003) DVD.
Bibliography
Baigorri, Laura, Ed. Video en Latioamérica. Una historia crítica . Madrid: Brumaria, 2008.
Briceño, Victor, and Rene Naranjo. “Entrevista a Juan Downey.” Catálogo Sexto Festival Franco-Chileno 
de Video Ar t. Santiago: Instituto Chileno-Francés de Cultura, 1986.
Burroughs, William S. “Electronic Revolution.” Ah Pook is Here, and Other Texts: The book of Breeething; 
Electronic Revolution . London: Calder, 1979.
Castellanos León, Israel. “José Angel Toirac and Meira Marrero.” Art Nexus  6, no. 66 (2007): 144–145.
Foster, Hal. “An Archival Impulse.” October  110 (Fall 2004): 3–22.
García Canclini, Néstor. “Mercosur: la bienal de la desglobalización.” Journal Porto Alegre  18, no. 31 
(2011): 165–167.
Gonzalez, Rita, and Jesse Lerner. Mexperimental Cinema: 60 Years of Avant-Garde Media Arts from 
Mexico . Santa Monica, CA: Smart Art Press, 1998.
Gutiérrez, Laura G. “Ximena Cuevas’s Critical Collages.” Performing Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras 
on the Transnational Stage, 151–166. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2010.
Hall, Doug, and, Sally J. Fifer, Eds. Illuminating Video: An Essential Guide to Video Art . New York: 
Aperture Foundation, 1990.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis . Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Iovino, María A. Contratextos . Bogotá: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, 2008.
Kember, Sarah and Joanna Zylinska. Life After New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process . Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2012.
La Ferla, Jorge, Ed. Historia Crítica del Video Argentino . Buenos Aires: Malba/Telefónica, 2008.
Machado, Arlindo . Máquina e imaginário: o desafio das poéticas tecnológicas . São Paulo: EDUSP , 1996.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Medina, Cuauhtémoc. “De la encarnación como dominio.” 3 Perspectivas: Exposición del Programa de 
Comisiones CIFO 2007 . Edited by María Belén Sáez de Ibarra and José Alejandro Restrepo, 67–72. 
Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de Colombia, 2011.
Mitchell, W . J. T. What Do Pictures Want? The Lives and Loves of Images . Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press, 2005.
Moreira Cruz, Roberto, Ed. Visionários: Audiovisual na América Latina . São Paulo: Itaucultural, 2008.
Morse, Margaret. “Nature Morte: Landscape and Narrative in Virtual Environments.” In Immersed in 
Technology: Art and Virtual Environments . Edited by Mary Anne Moser and Douglas MacLeod, 
195–232. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Mosquera, Gerardo. Caminar con el diablo: textos sobre arte, internacionalización y culturas . Madrid: Exit, 
2010.
178
E. VERGARANavas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
Restrepo, José Alejandro. “Iconomía.” In Arte, Ciencia y Tecnología. Un Panorama Crítico . Edited by 
Jorge La Ferla, 161–165. Buenos Aires: Espacio Fundación Telefónica, 2009.
Richard, Nelly. “Contra el pensamiento-teorema: una defensa del video arte en Chile.” Catálogo Sexto 
Festival Franco-Chileno de Video Arte . Santiago: Instituto Chileno-Francés de Cultura, 1986.
Ross, Christine. “Introduction.” In Precarious Visualities: New Perspectives on Identification in 
Contemporary Art and Visual Culture . Edited by Olivier Asselin, Johanne Lamoureux, and Christine 
Ross. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2008.
Spielmann, Yvonne. Video: The Reflexive Medium . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Žižek, Slavoj. The Plague of Fantasies . London: Verso, 2008.
12
RACE AND REMIX
The Aesthetics of Race in the  
Visual and Performing Arts
Tashima Thomas
Remix is a cultural practice that includes reintroductions of preexisting sources mixed 
together via the practice of cut/copy and paste. This act of sampling in remix incorpo -
rates the fragmentation of various sampled beats vivifying the effect of the composition’s 
style or quality. The remixing and sampling of beats is a strategy popularized in music; 
however, when considering remix strategies within a visual context, it is possible to 
theorize how remix operates among visual compositions—including those that deal with 
race. A discussion of race and remix theory in Latin America challenges the inclination 
to flatten and marginalize racial and cultural aesthetics and experiences. What follows 
is a critical reading of the aesthetics of remix in relation to race in the visual and per -
forming arts of Latin America and the Caribbean. This assemblage of visual remix strate -
gies is organized according to three compositional strategies: the Casta Grandmaster 
Remix, the Banana Remix, and the Monster Mash Remix. Each remix strategy demon -
strates a variation of the sampling and reassembling of racialized bodies. The purpose of 
this research is to create a visual soundtrack, per se, that will illustrate the nuances and 
complexities of how race, and particularly blackness, is constructed and remixed  in the 
cultural imaginary.
I elaborate on the cultural-intertextuality of these remixes as they relate to a visual 
archive that can be experienced within a cultural space. For example, nineteenth-  
century Impressionist paintings are often referred to as possessing a kind of “photographic 
vision,” that is having a quality of representing a suspended moment in time. This suggests 
a connection between paintings conventionally experienced statically with photography 
which is associated with the temporal experience capturing snatches of time. Kirk 
Varnedoe dismantles the idea of Impressionist works representing “snapshots” by revealing 
how the production of photographs contemporary with Impressionist painting have yet to 
conjure a photo that looks anything like Edgar Degas’s painting, Place de la Concorde of 
1875. Varnedoe observes the nineteenth-century photographic endeavor aspiring to 
greater control and selectivity while countering with the Impressionists’ aspiration to 
greater spontaneity or receptiveness.1 He reaffirms the instantaneity of the accidental 
found in nineteenth-century photography as a kind of meaningless static, saying that, 
“With structures of time, just as with structures of space, what photographers involuntarily 
tolerated as eccentricities, these painters independently and aggressively pursued and 
180
T. THOMASdeveloped as the basis of a cohesive new reality.”2 What I am suggesting is to consider 
viewing paintings in a way that belies static attributions, but rather as possessing sequential 
rhythms enlarging on a temporal experience. This formation of a “cohesive new reality” 
participates in a variation of remix when considering the aesthetics of individual elements 
that shifts the spatial reference to the temporal. Thus, the somewhat delimiting sequential 
experience of music within fragmented time can serve as a larger model for the temporal 
experience by applying this to how we experience paintings. The precision of selectivity 
by musicians and painters informs their work by including certain elements and excluding 
others. This practice of selection assists in the construction of the composition’s spatial 
structure. The remixed projects that follow exhibit some form of selectivity defining their 
composition.
The Casta Grandmaster Remix
What I refer to as the Casta Grandmaster Remix incorporates extended  and selective  
remix practices.3 The extended  remix is expressed as a longer version of the original song. 
This particular kind of remix became popular during the mid-1970s when DJs length -
ened musical compositions by several minutes, fulfilling a cultural need by creating 
arrangements that were more danceable. The Casta Grandmaster Remix is a semiepony -
mous reference to one of the pioneers of hip hop, DJing, cutting, and mixing, 
Grandmaster Flash, who developed innovative techniques that are foundational to the 
practice of musical remix.4 Applying the principles of pioneering DJing techniques to 
visual compositions paves the way to an introduction of cutting and mixing within 
extended arrangements. Therefore, as a nod to one of the forefathers of remix and hip 
hop, the debut record on this visual soundtrack is called the “Casta Grandmaster 
Remix.” Visual productions foundational to the study of the aesthetics of race and remix 
are also found in casta paintings of colonial Mexico.
Casta paintings were a series of images commissioned by the Spanish or creole elite 
during colonial Mexico. The terms criollo  and/or creole are used here to describe a person 
of Spanish decent born in New Spain during the colonial period. The series of casta 
paintings varied in number to include up to 16 paintings describing the various racial 
mixtures of the inhabitants. Casta paintings were pseudoscientific family portraits 
including particular tropes used to identify the population and new racial mixtures. The 
Spanish did not take very many Spanish women with them at the time of conquest and 
during the colonial period. The scarcity of Spanish women and the imperialist desire for 
expansion led to the engagement of Spanish men in interracial relationships with indig -
enous and African women. Casta paintings offered a visual record of these interracial 
relationships systematically organized according to the idea of the family unit—the 
father, mother, and offspring along with some indication of profession or class.
The earliest identified casta paintings began with a series of four works in 1711 attrib -
uted to Manuel Arellano. The original four casta paintings were: Rendition of a Mulatto , 
Rendition of a Mulatto , Rendition of a Chichimeca , and Rendition of a Chichimeco .
The first two paintings are of mixed-race subjects with parents of African and Spanish 
descent. The latter two works are of indigenous subjects. These works are considered to 
be the prototype for all other casta paintings. As such, I attribute these foundational 
works to the extended  remix. Rendition of a Mulatto (Figure 12.1 ), which features a mixed-
race woman of African descent, and Rendition of a Chichimeco  are simplified by only 
presenting a singular individual in the composition; both paintings include the addition 
181
RACE AND REMIXof a young child. The original four casta paintings represent the extended  remix. They 
function as expanded versions of the original composition as yet uncomplicated by  
the adding and deleting of various sounds/images. The original composition would  
have been the real-life person or imagined personage on whom they are modeled. As the 
original casta paintings, this set of four works provides a more mixable palette for future 
artists to remix. These works introduced the idea of the pictorial illustration of racialized 
bodies, offspring, and an indication of lifestyle or calidad , which is a performance of 
social identity that included variables such as a person’s skin color, race, class, occupa -
tion, clothing, and social conditions. I elaborate on these locations of performance and 
identity in further detail when discussing the Banana Remix.
Confirming artistic indebtedness to the original four casta paintings, Ilona Katzew 
writes, “Modeled after Arellano’s series are two sets attributed to Juan Rodríguez 
Juárez  . . . Many of the figures in the complete set strongly rely on Arellano’s models”5 
Therefore, the figures in the original casta paintings furnish the racial “types” which 
operate as solitary beats plucked for insertion and reinsertion into new compositions. 
Figure 12.1   Manuel Arellano, Rendition of a Mulatto , 1711, oil on canvas (photo courtesy 
of Manuel Arellano via Collection of Jan and Frederick Mayer, Denver)
182
T. THOMASThe public accessibility of viewing racial “types” becomes more widespread as casta 
paintings were presented in quasi-public spaces. As a result of the growing access to casta 
paintings and the racial stereotypic tropes they represent a second form of remix begins 
to develop. As noted above, the extension of the original song becomes complicated 
with the addition of various figures within the composition. This is what is referred to 
as selective  remix.
The selective  remix maintains its relationship to the original while adding and sub -
tracting elements from it. This dependency on recognition of the original composition 
is captured in the stability of its own specialness. A remix’s specialness refers to the idi -
osyncratic elements of compositions which can be isolated, repeated, and recognized in 
various reincarnations. Remixes are dependent upon the acknowledgement of the origi -
nal source material or what I describe as a work’s relentless distinctiveness. What hap -
pens next is a proliferation of selective  remixes based on casta painting extended  remixes. 
The selectivity of this remix adds and subtracts figures from the original casta paintings, 
but without diminishing essential distinctive sequences. For example, Miguel Cabrera’s 
From Spaniard and Mulata, Morisca , 1763 ( Figure 12.2 ), is painted 52 years after 
Arellano’s Rendering of a Mulatto .
Figure 12.2   Miguel Cabrera, From Spaniard and Mulata, Morisca , 1763, oil on canvas 
(photo courtesy Miguel Cabrera via private collection)
183
RACE AND REMIXCabrera refers to Arellano’s Rendering of a Mulatto  (Figure 12.1 ) and cuts/copies and 
pastes the figure of the mulata  into a selective  remix. Cabrera makes three additions by 
adding a Spanish father, a son, and a daughter. The similarities between Arellano’s and 
Cabrera’s mulata  figure are striking, therefore maintaining or transmitting the special 
characteristics or relentless distinctiveness from Arellano’s composition. Both mulata  
figures are wearing a billowy overblouse called a manga , often worn by Afro-Mexicans, 
over a floral print dress. Both figures have similar honeyed complexions, coiffed hair -
styles, facial features, and exhibit the same averted glance. The recognition of the origi -
nal source material (Arellano’s work) is uncompromised and duplicated through the 
feature of cut/copy and paste and remixed with the additional added figures thereby 
creating a new work. Although the relentless distinctiveness, or distinguishable charac -
teristics, from Arellano’s mulata  figure remains faithful in racial aesthetic and in attire 
in Cabrera’s work, what makes Cabrera’s painting a new remix is the improvisation of 
additional figures. Like improvising new beats on a popular riff, Cabrera repeats a racial 
trope that is recognizable, memorable, and recurring.
Casta paintings were attempts to classify the various racial nuances of the rapidly 
diversifying population and thereby assigned nomenclatures such as “wolf” and “coyote” 
to identify racially mixed persons. This brand of identity formation was part of a national 
project in New Spain that functioned to satisfy European curiosity by classifying the 
Other in an attempt to “enlighten” Spaniards. While other scholars have investigated 
the process of naming conventions as they relate to power and control , I will focus now 
on how the endlessness of racial remixing within casta painting relates to the selective  
remix.
As one of the more successful casta painting artists, Cabrera defined the effective 
treatments of these compositions and was emulated by other artists creating additional 
remixes. Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear describe the endless hybridization pos -
sibilities for remix, “In the sense that each new mix becomes a meaning-making resource 
for subsequent remixes, there is no end to remixing. Each remix in principle expands 
the possibilities for future remixes.”6 The adding and subtracting of various racial mix -
tures within casta paintings provides multiple possibilities of combinations or remixes. 
Casta paintings repeated the classification of racial mingling like beats in compositions—  
repeating the same images through the use of cut/copy and paste. These new composi -
tions or remixes seem inexhaustible in their recombinations of racial mixtures, offspring, 
and indications of class, trade or calidad . Some works focus on labor and have included 
pastoral countryside scenes, and others include scenes within the city or domestic inte -
rior. Some of these remixes also served as propaganda for the industriousness of racial 
hybridity in the new world, stressing conformance to Bourbon reforms, showcasing natu -
ral resources, and as a platform to reconfirm racial stereotypes. It is the familiarity of 
these racial tropes that operate as a memorable theme and recur in each new remix with 
infinite possibilities.
The ritualistic sequencing of racialized bodies become enactments of racial mytholo -
gies and function as a sociological adhesive uniting a nation under a mythical conscious -
ness. Casta paintings succeeded in the illustration and repetition of perceived racial 
difference. Although a valid argument can be made about the presentation of class dif -
ference in casta paintings, the paintings themselves are titled according to racial taxono -
mies. For example, typical painting titles include: Black and Spaniard makes Mulatto  or 
Mestizo and Indian makes Coyote . The interdependence of ritual and myth are opportuni -
ties to “perform the world” and the way things ought to be in “conscious tension with 
184
T. THOMASthe way things are.”7 The selectivity  of most casta paintings endeavors to organize a 
recently colonized space and population as part of a much larger national project. The 
rhythmic sequencing of racial types invokes the myth-and-ritual ontology. The compul -
sive reiteration of material and visual rhetoric in casta paintings not only provides an 
endless series of racial remixes, but seeks to “perform the world” in the way the world 
should be in conscious tension to the way that it is actually experienced.
The Banana Remix
In the 1943 classic film, The Gang’s All Here  (Figure 12.3 ), Carmen Miranda’s bananas 
and strawberries performance is the acute manifestation of Roland Barthes’s masculine 
and feminine gender assignments to food. Barthes’s semiological pioneering interpreta -
tions of food constitute a sign system signifying masculinity to bananas and femininity 
to strawberries. The phallocentric bananas sharing the stage with the ripe strawberries 
illuminate male sexual desire imposed on the female body. Carmen Miranda’s dress is 
trimmed with red strawberries as she balances a headdress of yellow bananas on her 
head. Most of Miranda’s outfits were specifically modeled after the traditional, colonial 
dress of the Bahianas (black women from Bahia in the northern region of Brazil). The 
Bahianas wore long skirts, ruffled blouses, and had baskets on their heads full of fruit to 
sell in the marketplace. Carmen Miranda’s sartorial interpretation of the attire of black 
women from Bahia would become her most recognized aesthetic.
Figure 12.3  Carmen Miranda in Busby Berkeley’s The Gang’s All Here , 1943
185
RACE AND REMIXIn the documentary, Carmen Miranda: Bananas Is My Business , the narrator explains 
the origins of Carmen Miranda’s image saying, “Carmen was our dancing doll; white to 
disguise the blackness of the music she grew up with; the blackness of most of her musi -
cian friends; and of the origins of her outfit.”8 Carmen Miranda’s cultural appropriation 
of blackness through the modeling of her persona after black Bahianas is an active case 
of remix and sampling. This extended use of cultural sampling becomes remixed through 
adaptation and allegory while maintaining its relentless distinctiveness. Consequently, 
Carmen Miranda’s image functions as a performative, reflexive  remix sampling fragments 
of Brazilian blackness including dress, jewelry, musical traditions, style, and panache. 
The Banana Remix is a cultural aesthetic capitalizing on recognizable themes of mulat -
taness, but also challenges the remix’s sequencing by manipulating certain notes. This 
brand of remix allegorizes and extends the aesthetic of sampling, claims autonomy even 
when carrying the name of the original, and leaves the original tracks largely intact and 
recognizable.9
Carmen Miranda was born on February 9, 1909 in Portugal to parents of Portuguese 
descent who would later emigrate to Brazil. Although Miranda was a Portuguese-born 
Brazilian, arguably she symbolized mulatta culture. The aesthetics of her persona was 
one of a mixed-race woman of African descent, not unlike the Afro-Brazilian women of 
Bahia. Angela and Onik’a Gilliam discuss the definition of Brazilian mulattaness as 
being that of a “showgirl” and explain that the term mulatta also may refer to a profes -
sional job description: “To dress like a mulata is  . . . to put on a long skirt, high-heeled 
shoes with platform soles  . . . It can even be in the daytime, but the mulata is going to 
put on her heels and arrive very well put together  . . . walking around pretty, deco -
rated.”10 The Gilliams further define mulattaness as being shaped by, “the intention of 
men toward a woman; the woman who is sexualized is thrust into the mulata subject 
position.”11 Therefore, Carmen Miranda embodies the performativity of the mulatta as 
she was a professional Brazilian “showgirl,” who wore the costume of mulattas, including 
the platform soles for which she became famous. Her hypersexualized persona as an 
object of male desire also subscribes to the definition of mulattaness. The opening per -
formance of strawberries and bananas is a cogent witness to the objectification of the 
mulatta body.
In addition to singing songs like, “Anti-Metropolitan Mulato” and “Back from the 
Samba,” Carmen Miranda also sang a song referencing the black women of Bahia where 
she inventories what a woman from Bahia has: a silk turban, golden earrings, golden 
chains, a lace bustier, and golden bracelets. Miranda’s cultural Banana Remix appropri -
ates the decorated body of the Bahiana by adopting the silk turban, golden earrings, 
golden chains, golden bracelets, etc., and yet refashions the memorableness of the 
Bahiana personification. Miranda allegorizes the magical qualities of the remix’s relent -
less distinctiveness that are most identifiable. She is a symbolic representation of black -
ness without the blackness. By embodying the personification of Bahiana blackness or 
mulattaness through sampling the accoutrements of black style she becomes a reflexive 
remix. However, it is Miranda’s whiteness that challenges the distinguishing rhetoric. 
Miranda’s appropriation of blackness in her persona was not unique; however, it may 
best illustrate how strategies of sampling intersect with the concept of authorship as 
visited in the work of Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault.
In Roland Barthes’s essay, “The Death of the Author” and in Michel Foucault’s “What 
Is an Author?” both discuss the relationships between authorship and readers.12 Barthes 
and Foucault investigate through a series of interrogatives, epistemological 
186
T. THOMASconstructions, and historical analysis the links between the author, the reader, or critic, 
and the unity of a text. Barthes describes the death of the author as a function of the 
writing process. Through the recounting of the text the author loses his voice, a gap 
appears—the author dies and writing commences. Barthes asserts the death of the 
author is aimed at her identity as a result of the neutering process of writing.13 Similarly, 
Miranda’s reflexive  remix challenges the original text of blackness where the author loses 
her voice, a gap appears, the death of the author ensues and the reader deciphers the 
text. In other words, the original text of the identity of the black body is lost and the 
reader deciphers the text as a white identity or body. Remix commences.
At the outset of “What Is an Author?” Foucault explicitly clarifies that in his  
discussion he is setting aside a sociohistorical analysis of the author as an individual, the 
cultural status of the author, and other research into authenticities, attributions, and 
systems of valorization.14 However, unlike Barthes, Foucault is not suggesting an anni -
hilation of the author, but rather a dislocation or decentering of the author in order to 
lay hold on a greater comprehension of the relationship between the author and the text 
and as a kind of subversion of the historical privileging of the author. Whereas Barthes 
applies a reading of the speech-act and examination of linguistics, Foucault investigates 
the gaps by exploring the use of the “author-function.”
Foucault describes how the author-function does not operate uniformly along all dis -
courses, but is tied to legal and institutional systems where attributions to texts are 
required. Foucault goes on to elaborate on this form of investigation that returns to the 
text itself in order to affect historical discursive analysis. He describes how the complexi -
ties of the author-function, “could also reveal the manner in which discourse is articu -
lated on the basis of social relationships.”15 As previously stated, Miranda’s sampling of 
black style and presentment was not original, but an editorial power of selection or 
extended sampling found in the reflexive  remix. Navas describes how sampling allows for 
the death of the author and the author-function to take effect in late capitalism, “because 
‘writing’ is no longer seen as something truly original, but as a complex act of resam -
pling—as the reinterpretation of material previously introduced.”16 Perhaps this is one 
of the reasons why the reinterpretation of Miranda’s image would come to represent a 
hybridization of South American identities. Miranda’s cultural remix favors the extended 
sampling of fragmented elements over the whole, which may lead to inaccurate readings 
and misinterpretations. Miranda would later suffer harsh criticism for this appearance of 
cultural homogeneity as an aesthetic misrepresentation of Brazilian and Latin American 
identities. Although she never claimed to represent a singular Latin American identity, 
her persona was attributed these duties by a system, similar to the casta paintings. 
Miranda’s image serves as a commodified fetish of mulattaness. Interestingly, the reflexive  
remix demands that the viewer question everything that is presented.17 Even Miranda 
herself would later question the stereotype of the “Brazilian Bombshell” or the “Latina 
Spitfire.” She began to understand the limitations and damage caused by the extended 
sampling of hypersexualized blackness.
The repetition of racial types informs mythologized notions of racial identity. In The 
Location of Culture , Homi K. Bhabha states that, “the same old  stories of the Negro’s 
animality, the Coolie’s inscrutability or the stupidity of the Irish must be told (compul -
sively) again and afresh, and are differently gratifying and terrifying each time.”18 The 
traditional colonial treatment of the mulatta body is as a fantastical locus of playful 
exchange. Her image is one of sexual profundity as represented in the many seeded fruits 
in her headdress and outfit. The poster for the documentary, Carmen Miranda: Bananas 
187
RACE AND REMIXIs My Business , says it best: “An explosion of fantasy, energy and playful eroticism.” 
Miranda’s remixed hybridization of the mulatta body receives an apotheosis of objecti -
fication in this poster. The advertisement capitalizes on the stereotype of the mulatta 
aesthetic as fantastical, full of inexhaustible sexual energy, and sexually available. The 
Banana Remix is reauthored with greater public access and profound susceptibility to 
the repetition of damaging racial stereotypes.
The Monster Mash Remix
The Monster Mash Remix offers a critical reading of the character Tia Dalma/Calypso 
(Naomie Harris) from Walt Disney’s two films, Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man’s Chest  
(2006) and At World’s End (2007). Calypso, also known as Tia Dalma in the films, 
embodies the stereotype of the tragic mulatta figure typical of the colonial desire of the 
mulatta body. For example, Tia Dalma/Calypso, as the only black character in the films, 
is rendered as a hypersexualized body and delivers dialog filled with double entendre and 
mystical divinations. By applying regenerative  remix theory, it becomes evident that the 
character of Tia Dalma/Calypso is reiterative of white male, patriarchal desire for the 
mulatta/Afro-Caribbean body fulfilling the formulaic cinematic stereotype of the tragic 
mulatta. The image of Calypso is a performative embodiment of remix as an extra-  
species mashup of mulatta/monster identities.
The Pirates of the Caribbean  series is a multibillion-dollar franchise in which critics 
have scarcely read race into the series. If regenerative  remix takes place in a nonlinear, 
ahistorical fashion then the fantastical Caribbean of Pirates  is its own regenerative  remix. 
A simulacrum of the Caribbean represented in Pirates of the Caribbean  is blanketed in 
whiteness and seldom represents blackness, even though the Caribbean as a paramount 
center of transatlantic slavery was predominantly canvassed with black bodies. As a 
utopian paradise of whiteness where one rarely catches a glimpse of blackness (and there 
is certainly no representation of the transatlantic slave trade), the Caribbean presented 
in Pirates  is ahistorical. Although, Pirates  is written to take place during the seventeenth 
century, a period concomitant with the height of the triangular trading system, the black 
body has almost completely disappeared from the landscape—offering a revised 
history.
Calypso’s unrequited love is archetypal of the mulatta as a tragic figure. According to 
the script Calypso is of Afro-Cuban, mixed-race descent. The mulatta is mythologized 
as tragic because her body serves as the reminder and the remainder of a perceived illicit 
sexual encounter between whiteness and blackness. The politics of race are also the 
politics of sexuality when articulating the tragedy of the mulatta because it is the polic -
ing of sexuality that calls her being into question. The figure of the tragic mulatta is 
denied love and happiness because she is somehow pathologically cursed as a reminder 
of the tragedy of miscegenation. Francis Galton, the founder of eugenics believed that, 
“the mulatto was a tragic figure not because he or she was born into a biracist culture 
that offered no stable position but because he or she ‘contaminated’ the hereditary pool 
of (white) racial genius.”19
In At World’s End , we discover that Tia Dalma is in a complicated love affair with the 
pirate Davy Jones (Bill Nighy.) Jones’s mortal self was as an Anglo man, but now he has 
been transformed into the squid-like, humanoid monster covered in squishy tentacles and 
fitted with a giant crab claw for a left arm. Davy Jones’s transformation into the grotesque 
pirate monster can be read as a retribution for the forbidden love he shared with the 
188
T. THOMASmulatta Tia Dalma and therefore reads as a cautionary tale. Jones’s grisly mutations are also 
a reflection of the irreverent combination of Calypso’s monstrousness—a mashup of some -
thing monster, something evil, and something human. Thus I refer to Tia Dalma/Calypso 
as a Monster Mash Remix. Davy Jones was charged by Calypso with ferrying the souls of 
those who died at sea and if he fulfilled this duty he would be allowed to come ashore every 
ten years and be with the woman he loved—Calypso. After fulfilling his contract and 
coming ashore after ten years, Calypso was not there waiting for him and therefore vio -
lated her end of the contract. Feeling tricked and greatly despondent in being abandoned 
by Calypso, Jones becomes a menace on the seas exacting his fury. In a scene from At 
World’s End , the jailed Calypso is visited by Jones to whom she confides, “It has been tor -
ture trapped in this single form; cut off from the sea, from all that I love  . . . from you.”20 
Jones finally asks Calypso why she wasn’t there when he came ashore after ten years of 
fulfilling his duties ferrying the souls of those who died at sea. Calypso responds, “It’s my 
nature. Would you love me if I was anything but what I am?”21 This biologizing of race as 
natural reinforces the stereotype of the mulatta as capricious.
Not long thereafter we find the crucial scene in which Calypso is released from her 
mortal form of Tia Dalma. Tia Dalma stands bound in heavy ropes on a ship surrounded 
by pirates beginning the ceremony of her manumission. In releasing Calypso from her 
human form the pirates hope she will grant them her powers to rule the seas and therefore 
profit considerably from her talents. Captain Hector Barbosa (Geoffrey Rush) commands, 
“Calypso! I release you from your human bonds,” as he lights the talisman on fire.22 The 
incantation was unsuccessful as the spell is only solvent when the words are spoken to 
Calypso as if to a lover. The wacky-eyed pirate, Ragetti (Mackenzie Cook) whispers 
sweetly in Calypso’s ear, as if to a lover saying, “Calypso, I release you from your human 
bonds.”23 Calypso inhales the smoke from the fiery talisman and the transformation begins. 
She begins to tremble and grow exceedingly agitated. William Turner (Orlando Bloom) 
asks her to identify who it was that betrayed her. She trembles greatly and answers, “Name 
him!” to which he replies, answering his own question, “Davy Jones.”24 Calypso’s manu -
mission from her human form is catapulted as she grows larger and larger in size, bursting 
the bonds of the ropes binding her. The pirates surrounding Calypso tighten their ropes 
restraining her body. As she grows larger and larger so do the expanses of bare flesh reveal -
ing a partially naked body. The mise-en-scène of a crew of white seamen restraining an 
enslaved black female body with heavy ropes is powerfully charged, summoning recogni -
tion of the cataclysmic violence inflicted upon black bodies during the transatlantic slave 
trade. Furthermore, the captor’s fear of manumission meant the fear of releasing a “mon -
ster,” as well as the fear of losing wealth and advantage. These fears are played out on a 
black female body as a performative embodiment of the Monster Mash Remix.
Calypso reaches gargantuan proportions as Captain Barbosa and his crew kneel before 
her in obeisance. Barbosa begs her favors saying, “Calypso  . . . I come before you as but 
a servant, humble and contrite. I have fulfilled me vow, and now ask your favor  . . . Spare 
meself, me ship, me crew and unleash your fury upon those who dare pretend themselves 
your masters, or mine.”25 Barbosa hopes to manipulate Calypso’s favors and profit finan -
cially. He is quoted as stating earlier regarding the potentiality of freeing Calypso, 
“Imagine all the power of the seas brought to bear against our enemy.”26 Calypso shouts 
in a manner of speech not clearly understood. After referencing the script, I found 
Calypso roars in her tirade, “ Malfaiteur en Tombeau, Crochir l’Esplanade, Dans l’Fond 
d’l’eau !” which roughly translates from French to, “Across the deepest waters of the 
ocean, find the path to he who wrongfully entombed me.”27 Shortly thereafter Calypso 
189
RACE AND REMIXhas manifested as a terrible maelstrom debilitating the ship of her former lover, Davy 
Jones, and bringing victory to the ship of Barbosa.
At the height of her harangue, Calypso erupts into an avalanche of crabs which begin 
to pour from her giant mouth and soon her whole body is transformed into a mountain of 
crabs flooding the crew. The ship is rocked back and forth as the Calypso crab body/bodies 
return to the water. The Calypso crab body/black body returning to the waters of the 
Atlantic is painfully evocative of black bodies committed to the sea by their captors either 
in hopes of financial gain (insurance claims as with the slave ship, Zong), or in the casting 
overboard of half-dead or dead bodies, and even the frequent suicides of enslaved Africans. 
This returning of the crab to the waters is also reflected in the trope of the tragic mulatta 
returning to her black community and rejecting “passing” in white society. Calypso sym -
bolizes the practice of passing because she was secretly a powerful goddess passing as 
human. She rejects this “passing” and returns to her native state as the goddess Calypso.
LeiLani Nishime discusses the embodiment of mulattaness and monsterness. Nishime 
argues the correlations between the term “monsters” or cyborgs in the horror/science 
fiction genre and mulattaness stating, “The good cyborg perfectly replicates the stereo -
type of the tragic mulatto/a.”28 Nishime refers to the 1982 film Blade Runner  as a replica -
tion of this motif stating, “Often she is shown as caught between two worlds, and since 
she is obviously the result of an illicit relationship, she suffers from a melancholy of the 
blood that inevitably leads to tragedy.”29 The Monster Mash Remix operates in a way 
that adopts elements from at least two distinct sources which are constantly changing 
while maintaining certain characteristics. The shifting processes of reflexivity are 
expressed through the constant change of Calypso’s body. She is biologically entombed 
in a physical, female form. This body changes in the process of manumission and she 
becomes a giant Calypso. However, this giant body changes into multiple crab bodies 
and returns to the sea. Calypso then changes again into a torrential thunderstorm. Her 
difference is marked by the constant reflexiveness of biological processes. She is a 
mashup of mulatta and monster—two distinct individual sources which are a reflection 
of constant cultural change. This marriage of mulatta and monster is also a cultural com -
mentary on the previously mentioned perceived abominableness of mixed-race offspring. 
The typical genre of the monster is one in which she must not inhabit the realm of the 
mainstream. As a familiar trope repeated in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein , the monster 
must die. In Pirates of the Caribbean , the monster dies out of her human form and is 
transformed in a way that positions her within the margins of the action and yet offers 
a freedom from the constriction of social norms. Calypso is an ahistorical mashup of 
distinct source material without relying on the memorable theme of previous remixes. 
She is first a mashup because of her mulattaness and therefore already implicated as 
monstrous. Her racial in-betweeness is ranked transgressive and carries threats of aber -
ration because she challenges the boundaries between whiteness and blackness. It is a 
well-established trope among gothic literary genre to integrate the mulatta or “half-
breed” with the monstrous as found in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein , the vampiric, or the 
werewolf because of the idea of racial contamination. Furthermore, when the racialized 
mashup becomes remashed we enter the second order of remix where the human inter -
sects with the nonhuman grotesque, creating a ghoulish resonance of the Monster Mash 
Remix. Although Calypso’s identity favors previously remixed tropes of the mulatta as 
tragic or hypersexualized, her mashup of mulatta and monster creates a new remix that 
is constantly updated because of the reiteration of the visual archive reproducing images 
of the racially mixed as grotesque. The potency of these ideological constructions is 
190
T. THOMASenduring because of the repeated gothicizing of blackness as problematic and the empha -
sizing of the depravity of miscegenation which maintains an ideologically racist archive. 
H. L. Malchow describes gothicized racial representations as rooted in and reinforcing 
other areas of prejudice and fear. Malchow describes the use of an “imperial gothic,” 
having elements of atavism, the occult, the grotesque, and the sadistic as being to a large 
extent racial gothic.30 Therefore, as an adoption of the “imperial gothic,” the mashup of 
beast-mulatta located in Calypso can be interpreted as a Monster Mash Remix.
Conclusion
By examining remix as a cultural framework for understanding the aesthetics of race in 
visual representations, we find fragmented bodies that are sampled, reassembled, and 
repeated like beats producing memorable anthems. Through the use of remix theory as an 
exploratory strategy it is possible to uncover the ruptures and reassemblages of racialized 
identities as they relate to national projects, public access, commodified fetishism, and 
other cultural flows. “Remix means to take cultural artifacts and combine and manipulate 
them into new kinds of creative blends.”31 These new creative blends may include addi -
tions and deletions of various elements that somehow maintain distinctive characteristics 
exemplifying memorable themes. Remix discourse offers a diversification of instruments 
and practices for negotiating cultural flows as reflected in the Casta Grandmaster Remix 
and the Banana Remix. However, as in the case of the Monster Mash Remix, material 
from two distinct sources combine in ways that are ahistorical, constantly changing, and 
yet revelatory of the consistency of racialized tropes of blackness.
Notes
 1 Kirk Varnedoe. “Artifice of Candor: Impressionism and Photography Reconsidered.” Art in America  68 
(1980), 72.
 2 Ibid., 75.
 3 See, in addition, regarding the nuances of these terms and their relevant musical and artistic examples, 
Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  (New York: Springer, 2012), 65–74.
 4 Grandmaster Flash, also known as Joseph Saddler, was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 
2007 along with the Furious Five. They were the first rap/hip hop musical artists to receive this honor. 
Grandmaster Flash is credited for creating the crossfader and experimenting with innovative remixing 
techniques such as backspin, punch phrasing, and scratching.
 5 Ilona Katzew, Casta Painting: Images of Race in Eighteenth-Century Mexico  (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2004), 15.
 6 Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear, “Remix: The Art and Craft of Endless Hybridization.” Journal of 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy  52, no. 1 (September 2008), 26.
 7 William G. Doty, Mythography: The Study of Myths and Rituals  (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama 
Press, 2000), 335.
 8 Carmen Miranda: Bananas Is My Business , Channel Four Films and Riofilme, 1995, filmstrip.
 9 Navas, Remix Theory , 66.
10 Angela Gilliam and Onik’a Gilliam, “Odyssey: Negotiating the Subjectivity of Mulata Identity in Brazil.” 
Latin American Perspectives  106 (1999), 64.
11 Ibid., 66.
12 Eduardo Navas and others have written extensively on Barthes and Foucault describing how remix is 
informed by poststructural approaches to reading and writing.
13 Roland Barthes, “Death of the Author.” Aspen  5/6, 1967.
14 Foucault, Michel, “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and 
Interviews by Michel Foucault (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 115.
15 Ibid., 137.
16 Navas, Remix Theory , 136.
191
RACE AND REMIX17 Ibid., 104.
18 Homi K. Bhabha. The Location of Culture  (London: Routledge Classics, 1994), 111, original emphasis.
19 Shawn Michelle Smith, American Archives: Gender, Race and Class in Visual Culture  (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press), 127.
20 Pirates of the Caribbean: At World’s End  (Walt Disney Pictures/Jerry Bruckheimer Films, 2007), filmstrip.
21 Ibid.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid.
26 Ibid.
27 Ibid.
28 LeiLani Nishime. “The Mulatto Cyborg: Imagining a Multiracial Future.” Cinema Journal  44, no. 2 
(2005), 40.
29 Nishime, “The Mulatto Cyborg,” 40.
30 H. L. Malchow mines the literary archive in Gothic Images of Race in Nineteenth-Century Britain  (Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1996) and elaborates on how works such as Robert Louis Stevenson’s Dr. 
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , Bram Stoker’s Dracula , and H. G. Well’s The Island of Dr. Moreau  operate as cultural 
studies documenting the relationship between racial anxieties, the imperial realm, and a gothic sensibil -
ity. In addition, Maisha L. Wester’s African American Gothic: Screams from Shadowed Places  (New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2012) explores gothic fiction and racial discourses.
31 Knobel and Lankshear, “Remix: The Art and Craft of Endless Hybridization,” 22.
Bibliography
Barthes, Roland. “Death of the Author.” Aspen  5/6, 1967.
——. The Rustle of Language . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1984.
Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture . London: Routledge Classics, 1994.
Carmen Miranda: Bananas Is My Business . Channel Four Films and Riofilme, 1995. Filmstrip.
Doty, William G. Mythography: The Study of Myths and Rituals . Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama 
Press, 2000.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and 
Interviews by Michel Foucault , 113–138. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977.
Gilliam, Angela and Onik’a Gilliam, “Odyssey: Negotiating the Subjectivity of Mulata  Identity in 
Brazil.” Latin American Perspectives , 106 (1999): 60–84.
Katzew, Ilona. Casta Painting: Images of Race in Eighteenth-Century Mexico . New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2004.
Knobel, Michele and Colin Lankshear. “Remix: The Art and Craft of Endless Hybridization.” Journal 
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy  52, no. 1 (2008): 22–33.
Malchow, H. L. Gothic Images of Race in Nineteenth-Century Britain . Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1996.
Navas, Eduardo. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” Mashup Cultures . 
New York: Springer, 2010.
——. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
Nishime, LeiLani. “The Mulatto Cyborg: Imagining a Multiracial Future.” Cinema Journal  44, no. 2 
(2005): 34–49.
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World’s End . Burbank: Walt Disney Pictures/Jerry Bruckheimer Films, 2007. 
Filmstrip.
Smith, Shawn Michelle. American Archives: Gender, Race and Class in Visual Culture . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1999.
Varnedoe, Kirk. “Artifice of Candor: Impressionism and Photography Reconsidered.” Art in America  
68 (1980): 66–78.
Wester, Maisha L. African American Gothic: Screams from Shadowed Places . New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2012.
13
DIGITAL POETICS AND 
REMIX CULTURE
From the Artisanal Image to the 
Immaterial Image
Monica Tavares
The change in the systems for production of art that result from the use of digital media 
establishes a modification in the processes for the creation of images. At present, differ -
ent types of images coexist, distinguishing themselves in view of their ontological prin -
ciples of material generation. Those are: (1) first generation images, meaning images of 
artisanal and unique character; (2) second generation images, the technical images of 
reproducibility: gravure, photography, cinema, video; (3) third generation images, the 
technological images, made by computer or photonics with the help of numeric or treat -
ment programs and without the help of external references.
In those three logic image production models (i.e., the preindustrial, industrial, and 
postindustrial), coding processes are identified which sustain the displacement (not  
the substitution) from analogue to digital. Changes resulting from the use of digital media 
in the context of art do not imply the elimination of artisanal and mechanical tech -
niques, but rather a change of place for those techniques as they are transcoded to digital 
information systems. Under this assumption, the computer can be considered a metame -
dium, which incorporates different kinds of images from the numeric code.1
The digital media amplifies the cognitive—sensitive and intelligible—abilities of the 
creator, therefore characterizing a practice founded on a permanent dialog between 
individual and collective. New rules are imposed on the artist, demanding that she 
becomes familiar with techno-scientific models on an interconnection of practices and 
knowledge ( techné + logos ) arranged in interdisciplinary relations.
The contemporary forms of metacreation are supported by the notion of immaterial -
ity, considered as a new kind of materiality, which does not mean the absence of matter, 
but rather should be considered as a form of energy. This immateriality ensures the 
continuous flow and the instant commutation between codes and languages. The  
immaterial images are coded in numerical form; therefore, it can be treated, stored, and 
transmitted through different interfaces, or rather, through distinct forms of materiality, 
without loss or distortion.
193
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTUREThis chapter, then, aims at studying how immaterial potentialities of digital media 
amplify the artistic processes that are sustained in metacreation procedures—character -
istic of remix culture.
First, it will study how digital media potentiates metacreation processes and updates 
the traditional possibilities of montage, collage, and bricolage, considered in this text as 
key principles of remix culture.
Second, it will identify what is “new” with the introduction of remix culture in the 
creative processes, summarizing which differences are introduced in terms of art making 
and which are the challenges to be faced by the agents of the digital metacreation 
processes.
Mixing Media, Codes and Languages:  
From Intertextuality to Hypertextuality
Since the nineteenth century, the emergence of media, codes, and languages creates 
interferences among the classic genres (the so-called fine arts), leading them to an 
interpenetration which results in the erasure of their frontiers, and in the insertion of a 
text into another, that is, in the use of fragments abstracted from their context and 
included in different structures.
Based on the principles of intertextuality and dialogism, and on the concept of “strange -
ness” defined by Russian formalists, the appearance of artistic practices in which the recep -
tor is subtly requested to participate through his or her competence in associating and 
producing several signs is marked. The visual arts, by prioritizing the vocation for the 
employment of language therefore highlight, as creative conduct, the relations between 
procedure and material, which implies overcoming the art of representation. The ideas of 
art as description and mimesis start to be rejected. The artist begins to promote the 
exchange with an informed receptor, who is asked to interfere with the choice and articu -
lation of meanings, immanent to the work, brought from distinct references and texts.2
From Constructivism, Dadaism, and environmental art, the vocation for the employ -
ment of diverse languages makes evident a crisis that affects the materiality of the physi -
cal supports in artistic works. In those kinds of experimentations, such as mixture, 
chance, and casual juxtaposition, the preference for the accumulation of distinct objects 
is assumed; reinforcing the rupture of the traditional concept of genres, in turn, estab -
lishing the emergence of hybrid, impure works. Under this assumption, the use of mixed 
media becomes a key factor. There is a growing lack of interest for the objects, which 
consequently implies greater concern for the processes.3
Gradually, the participative processes and the use of the mixed media are generalized, 
anticipating the notion of interaction, in which the artist strives to engender reciprocal 
exchanges between the work and the viewer, through intelligent technological systems. 
In this assumption, the formation process of the work becomes relevant and the content 
of the artwork, many times, turns into nothing more than the communication process 
itself, sustained by the successive circulation of recoded messages and meanings.
Nevertheless, it was the characteristic of the montage, collage, and bricolage proce -
dures deriving from industrial assembly that inaugurated the reproductive operations of 
destructuring and restructuring. From those practices, the universes of originals and 
reproductions, in addition to maintaining parallelism and autonomy, also interpenetrate 
and semanticize each other. The industrial process, being essentially scientific, analyzes 
194
M. TA VARESthe model in parts aimed at its synthetic reconstitution, therefore allowing us to speak 
of a language process, in which paradigm and syntagma work together. Thus, the inter -
change between the parts—montage, collage, and bricolage—is a creative process deriv -
ing from the industrial assembly line.4
From that moment on, poetics of recoding, or rather of metacreation, introduce a new 
type of reading which leads to the disappearance of the linearity of the previous text, 
with a tendency to dissolving the authors, the bases to think on the notions of combina -
tion and metamorphosis. By privileging the creation of a new message based on data 
already known , those poetics operate through  intersemiotic translations, under some 
procedures: embedding one text into another, transposing a significant system to another 
and correlating artistic (or even extra-artistic) series. To sum up, their forms of operation 
are the following:5
1. As works of transformation and assimilation (montage) of several texts, operating 
by a centralizing project that holds meaning. The junction and orders are of the 
author. As historical examples, we should mention: the assembly of cubism, concrete 
poetry, op art, Valeryan poetry (pure poetry), the works of Mallarmé, of Marcel 
Breuer (industrial design), of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (architecture), among 
others.
2. As works of dissemination of texts in conflict of meanings, as pastiche and/or 
mixture (patchwork), in short, as collage. It is worth mentioning: surrealism, the 
collages made by students at their dorms, the works of Dostoyevsky (projection in 
the romance of juxtaposition between journalism and police narrative), Pollock, 
etc.
3. As works of continuity, mythopoetic (bricolage), in which we can observe the origin 
of the text mentioned. Seminal references of such type of procedure are: pop 
architecture, kitsch, works by Gaudí (architecture), Cage, and Duchamp, among 
many others.6
Thus, the work of transformation and assimilation of the different fragments based on 
montage (1) suggests, above all, a practice based on the notions of parataxis and para -
morphism, being marked by the poetic function of language. On collage (2), the work 
of transformation is based on the notions of a semantic montage, privileging the idea 
of conflict. And, on bricolage (3), the organization is structured on the assumption of 
a pragmatic montage, in which the contiguity universe invades the pole of similarity.7 
Basically, the characteristic of bricolage is to elaborate structured sets, but using resi -
dues and fragments of happenings. It creates structures through events.8 The creations 
are organized by a new arrangement of elements and the nature of each element is not 
modified, in view of its final arrangement, acquired in the set. Each fragment brings 
with it a syntagmatic context, which, when gathered, is reorganized in the form of a 
narrative.
Therefore, admitting that art also starts to be constituted of intertextual practices 
means to be able to face it as a work of interpenetration of speeches, in which the 
“unfinished principle” and the “dialogic opening” give it the mark of existence.
Artistic products constitute, in this sense, as a new order from the repertoire. We start 
to understand the aesthetic message in a more organized and manipulable way, dismiss -
ing with that certain concepts (such as that of genius), loaded with elitist prejudice. The 
code becomes the preestablished key for structuring and later decoding the message.
195
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTUREHowever, it is with Eco that the discussion is broadened, by admitting that the crea -
tive solution lies within a dialectic between form and opening organized by the creator. 
In this sense, the participative models are incorporated, naming the receptor as agent of 
the process.9 The value of aesthetic experience is not based on purely intuitive fruition, 
on the posture propagated by romanticism. There is the overcoming of the subjectivist 
speech of aesthetic; and its model is linked to a new parameter: information. This pre -
supposition allows the perception of aesthetics as an understanding process immersed in 
the social and cultural system.
Moreover, it is still worth observing that if intertextuality, in principle, incorporates 
the intrarelations between the same texts, intermedia, by restoring the notions of quali -
tative montage, is more recently supported by the interrelation between two different 
forms of language, which develop separately but put in effective correlation a transfor -
mation that historically involves the development of a new medium.
The concept of intermedia, coined by Dick Higgins in the 1960s, is then a formal 
category to define an interrelation among different forms of art that merge to become a 
new medium, characterizing a kind of “conceptual fusion.”10
In a similar way, Plaza defines intermedia as the combination of two or more channels 
from a matrix of invention. An intermediate process results from the montage of several 
media, from which another medium appears, which result from a qualitative synthesis. 
Intermedia bear, therefore, the association by similarity of several codes or semiotic 
systems from a matrix of invention. Consequently, it is the montage of several media 
leading to the appearance of another which is the qualitative sum of those that consti -
tute it. An unexpected datum is produced, that is, a quality montage.11
In addition, such transmutation of messages in multiple supports gives birth to what 
is called multimedia, also referred to by Plaza as the constitution of a new message based 
on already-known data. Nonetheless, it results from an association by contiguity of 
several codes and/or media under the sign of juxtaposition, implying conflict and col -
lage. In other words, it is the superposition of technologies without the sum resolving 
the conflict (most of the time appearing in advertising, TV , newspapers, social media, 
shop windows, clips etc.). From this perspective, multimedia is defined as the superposi -
tion of several technologies, equivalent to a collage of the media—the qualitative syn -
thesis does not exist in this case.12
In summary, both multimedia and intermedia are interdisciplinary categories which, 
as well as montage or collage (in reference to the previous procedures), call into question 
forms of production and individual creation and, above all, the notion of authorship. 
The creation with computers increases the development of those practices, as a form of 
interrelation and translation. Nowadays, artists benefit from the profusion of media of 
all types, which lend their differences to expand the creative work, notably through the 
interfaces.13
Thus, in the attempt to better comprehend the unfoldings of the poetics of metacrea -
tion in the remix culture, it is still important to understanding how digital media update 
the possibilities of montage, collage. and bricolage.
The new technological media absorb and incorporate the different language systems, 
translating them into new supports. Those transcoded languages make collaboration 
among several meanings, allowing for intersemiotic and creative transit between visual, 
verbal, acoustic, and tactile.
Digital media, in view of their inherent qualities, behave effectively in the concretiza -
tion of the so-called translation phenomenon. The signs numerically registered are 
196
M. TA VARESmanipulated in the most diverse forms and, in view of their fluidity as circulating mem -
ory, the transit of information becomes viable through different interfaces. The new 
technological media absorb the most diverse sign systems, allowing for the translation 
of those several languages into a hybrid product, which reveals itself in a new form, as a 
technique for creative discovery.
Such hybrid product—seen through the prism of digital media, according to 
Couchot—is no longer a closed and impenetrable space. The new technologies are 
pertinent to the notion of immateriality, or rather, the notion of immediate commuta -
tion defined by the “Imedia” phenomenon. In that culture of commutation, the interac -
tive manipulation of images, texts, data, installs itself, evidencing a prime interest in the 
processes of hybridization and metamorphosis. To Couchot, a new germ of temporal 
aesthetic appears. The frontiers of time and space are destroyed. Image becomes acces -
sible, simultaneously, to different spaces, in a process in which the immediate can be 
used as quality.14 Here, I believe, lies the foundation to understand how the digital media 
sustained the contemporary metacreation processes, as exemplified by mediatic products 
of remix culture.
The phenomenon of hybridization in the context of digital media potentiates, there -
fore, the dialogue among several languages, codes, and media. The eminence of an 
intermediatic space is amplified, dilating into—until then—unthinkable proportions 
the notion of plurality of discursive instances, of simultaneous voices, of dialogs, in 
which the complementarity of visions, comprehensions, and sensitivities is incorpo -
rated. The capacity to generate and maintain a dialogic, relation-maintaining opening 
is structurally reinforced.
It is through this immediate transit of information that the teleportation of signs 
between geographically different locations via telematics is ensured, further increasing 
the possibilities of exchange, now made available between different receptors.
Thus, the exchange between creator, receptors, and all previous texts contributes to 
installing recoding processes, as it is seen in the current remix products.
Moreover, digital media, by incorporating the possibilities of combination and per -
mutation, also become viable through the fundamental idea of hypertext which, by 
using nonlinear computer memories architecture, reverberates the mixture of media, 
codes, and languages.
Broadening this paradigm, an immaterial image also contemplates the notion of 
hypermedia,15 as a permutational, combinatory, and multimedia form. In this case, texts, 
sounds, images, etc. are connected through probabilistic links which, when diversely 
combined, may generate different information.
Hypertext and hypermedia are therefore delimitated as a structural potential brought 
by digital media. When placed in the hands of artists, it may allow for the composition 
and construction of a polyphonic space, which incorporates new forms of reading and 
participation. This space is therefore articulated, resulting from the interpenetration 
between different media and the dialog between distinct languages.
In short, it ensures an intersemiotic flux between the several meanings, made possible 
by the instant commutation of the immediate, given that the computer is capable of 
coding, transforming, articulating, and combining all that is inserted into it. Those 
hypertext and hypermedia dynamics allow the subjects to navigate through such a dis -
continuous web of information, updated by them at any time, thus characterizing the 
act of reading as a path, a labyrinth, a process to be constantly redefined in the succes -
sive moments of appearance of the image.
197
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTUREPainting, photography, text, newspapers, posters, videos, cinema, music, etc. provide 
the raw material for the concretization of this hybrid product, or, in other words, of this 
digital structure. The raw material, coming from different languages in the form of 
numerical information, circulates among the interfaces, determining a fluid transit of 
the message, characterized by its condition of pure immateriality. From such conditions 
the message transmutes itself, and may materialize not necessarily in the same type of 
support to which it was linked, but in different ones, therefore transcoding itself into 
other languages.
For its immaterial feature, and by offering endless choices and multimodal alterna -
tives, the digital metacreation can expand the relations of imbrication between different 
subjects, and between those and the messages produced and, still, between the latter and 
the previous texts from which they result.
While the possibilities of translation are increased, the conditions for authorship also 
gain a new focus. Autographic practices are minimized. The creative act is sustained by 
the field of ideas, of thoughts, of the collective, unquestionably opening itself to the recep -
tors. The artist acquires new functions, emphasizing more the process and less the result.
Such potentialities allow the receptor to assume the author’s position, mutually 
inverting the roles. In view of the contribution of digital technology, intertextual prac -
tice nowadays is overstated, ensured by the immediate interaction between production 
and reception.
Given that something can be updated to endless possibilities, what becomes increas -
ingly important—in the contemporary culture of “availability,”16 or in remix culture—is 
that the metacreation is now ensured by the new demand of network circulation and, 
consequently, the constant recodification of mass media messages.
The results of this are: the acceleration of exchanges, the mixture of disciplines, the 
remixing of products, and the inversion of roles.
The issue to be discussed in the next section is, therefore, the understanding of how 
the digital metacreation is used as means of consumption and dissemination of informa -
tion, seeking to answer what happened to the artistic creation in the dominance of  
remix processes. In this sense, it becomes essential to understand what supports the para -
digms of this new social reality, in which the circulatory operation of the network pre -
vails, having the means of communication and the logic of information consumption as 
logistic supports.
The Creation of Hybrids in Remix Culture
Making art, in the sphere of remix culture, amplifies the preindustrial and industrial 
image production models. In the postindustrial period, the artistic practice installs itself 
in the universe of techno-science. Materials change and processes are renewed, imposing 
upon the artist dilated forms of creation. The operation with the digital media happens 
through numerical and conceptual models of objects and materials.
The idea of creation as a reflex of the notable artist becomes increasingly distant, 
demystifying the creative genius. Creation is based on a collective practice. The creative 
function broadens its field of operation and incorporates practices inherent to other 
disciplines. Thus, it absorbs new meanings, acquiring a specificity of its own.
New forms of creation give birth to new forms of reception. The producer/consumer 
dichotomy is dissolved, mutually inverting the roles. In this context, there is the trend 
of information to be propagated and disseminated through different flows.
198
M. TA VARESNonetheless, whatever subliminally sustains such tendencies lies, quoting Rutsky, in 
the paradox of that technology heading towards the “invisibility,” increasingly perceived 
in the form of data or means of communication. Thus, technology starts to be considered 
a matter of cultural data, a matter of techno-culture.17 This contradiction, which sus -
tains the culture of availability and remix processes, stands out from the phenomenon 
of digitalization.
According to Rutsky, it allows for several cultural products to become easily reappro -
priated, hybridized, remixed, being retradable and reconsumed. Besides this, it allows 
the production of completely new information, based on commodities, ranging from 
computer software to digital communication technologies.18
Referring to Brand,19 Rutsky states that the value of information is not determined as 
it happens with material goods at its production level, but rather within the sphere of 
dispersive and reproducible processes by which information is consumed.20
From this perspective, the dissemination of information by consumption makes the 
subjectivity of each one become part of the proliferation of information, of flows of 
cultural consumption. Consumption is then seen as a means to exercise personal free -
dom and individual choice. The act of consumption or choice may be seen as the expres -
sion of individual identities.
In other words, the consumption of information has become an increasingly impor -
tant means of asserting an identity and preserving the status of an autonomous and 
free subject. In this sense, information consumption is less a matter of commodifica -
tion and fetishization of information than a way of fetishizing individuals themselves. 
Moreover, Rutsky even says that the consumption of information represents a vicious 
circle because the more distributors and consumers feel overwhelmed by the prolifera -
tion and dispersion that consumption triggers, the more desperately they try to rede -
fine themselves as subjects, so that they may reaffirm their sense of control over 
consumption.21
Rutsky further argues that if we preserve the idea that consumption—and the world 
of information—reaffirms the perspective of action in terms of a free and autonomous 
subject, such a subject will remain within that vicious cycle, and will support the prem -
ise of the consumption establishing itself simply as a matter of human control. For 
Rutsky, it is necessary to think of consumption not as an action or a course of action, 
but as an interaction process in which the individual, sometimes, participates without 
effectively understanding it.
Based on that assumption, Rutsky believes that the consumption of information has 
fewer things in common with the direct and linear moves of intelligible information 
than with the fluid and chaotic spread of “noise,”22 which features the period referred to 
in this chapter as the culture of remix or the culture of availability.
Thus, as stated by Rutsky, it is evident that, in the context of information consump -
tion, the representations of the technological life tend to destabilize the distinction 
between the subject and the object that supports the universalizing conception of the 
modern subject and his relationship with an equipped world. For Rutsky,23 if modernity 
defined the “human being” by the condition of individual (that is, by his alleged mastery 
in the world), then, the growing acceptance of a notion of autonomous technological 
agency implies the need to review the assumption in question.24
Seen in such light, technology becomes a continuous process of mutation, reproduc -
tion, assembly, and generation, which works in terms of its deranged logic of its own 
mutational aesthetic.25
199
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTUREIn fact, the mediation of culture by machines of information is evident. It is also pat -
ent that the universal language becomes technology, which acts as a widespread transla -
tor of all existence26 increasingly affecting the constitution of contemporary experience 
and, even more, the constitution of the messages. In logarithmic movement, things, 
relations, objects etc. mingle, remix, modify, and spread, with no criteria or categories 
to clearly explain such a change.
Therefore, the remixed products exposed from such context of relations is, above all, 
a “hybrid,” in the notion of “decal of plasticity,” which corresponds, in the words of 
Miranda,27 “to a zero degree of matter and which, as such, still is ‘material’.”
By admitting that the situations and experiences resulting from their need, mainly, to 
be “informed” or, as Flusser asserts,28 to impose form to matter, the cultural significance 
that the immaterial image absorbs today becomes evident. In short, whether as interface 
that feeds the (dis)simulation of possible worlds and images, whether as “method to 
program the behavior of the employees of the post-industrial society,”29 or as an infor -
mational “hybrid,” such a type of image begins to play a central role on the aesthetic and 
cultural development, as well as a political and social one.
The remixed products consolidate themselves as a vehicle to propose and sediment 
forms of communication, which usually sustain the consumption of information. 
Increasingly flexible processes of production, diffusion, distribution, and reception pre -
vail. Information materialized in its most different forms and plasticities becomes a 
trading currency.
As Hamelink states,30 the digitalization reinforces a social process in which the pro -
duction and distribution of information evolve to the most important economic activity 
of society. Information technology starts to work as the fundamental infrastructure, and 
information becomes a negotiable commodity on a global scale.
It is in this game—open to everything—that receptors start to explore the field of 
possibilities available. The image-glorification speeches and the paradigms of the circu -
latory operation of networks are enhanced, having the means of communication as 
logistic supports. Everything circulates, from what is in the order of information, which 
now reaches unsuspected levels of possibilities of combination, remix, blend, arrange -
ment, montage, until that which is in the order of the roles assumed by individuals in 
the sphere of society.
Nevertheless, the challenge in remix culture starts to be precisely, as Perniola31 
would say, the need of dealing with the experience of contemporary cultural manifes -
tations funded, at the same time, by Kant’s aesthetic disinterestedness and by 
Baudelaire’s antiaesthetic overinterestedness. For Perniola, in contemporary society, 
more and more the disinterestedness is transformed in physical well-being and the 
overinterestedness is dislocated by the culture of performance or result. Therefore, it 
is important to verify the existence of a network that sustains remixed actions in 
contemporary culture, maintained by the production of communicative contents, 
which emphasizes the interaction of signs, incessant sliding of meanings, flexibility, 
and superposition of roles and codes.
In remix culture, such dissolution of roles assumed by the agents of the creative act 
brings premises of a democratization of production and a socialization of reception. 
However, it is essential not to lose sight of the fact that creative decisions are much more 
related to and determined by new heteronomies. This demands that visual solutions are, 
necessarily, governed by the posture and meaning intended by those who invent them, 
which must imply awareness of language before the media.
200
M. TA VARESAimed at demystifying the mixtures of roles assumed by individuals, whether as pro -
ducer or as receptor, it is important to understand that, in arts in general, the biggest 
problem, as Plaza32 asserts, refers to the quality of the answer, of the meaning or of the 
interpretant. Such an important assumption reaffirms the perspective of developing that 
kind of critical and creative reception; that which is founded on the need to be made 
concrete by a receptor that knows how to choose the best options (singularly convenient 
to him), but which anyway updates the proposal then established by the artist. Therefore, 
a receptor plays the dual role of selecting and being selected.
Such a rare quality is inherent to those few readers, the ones who judge while enjoying 
and, at the same time, enjoy while judging (Goethe). In this case, as Risério33 would say, 
the ideas of disappearance of the figure of the author, as well as the lack of distinction 
between the author as the one who makes and the receptor as the one who enjoys, 
become naive assumptions. Thus, according to Risério, we must not forget the need for 
the artwork to sustain itself on the Barthesian differentiation between the notions of 
“ ‘intransitive’ writer” ( écrivain ) and “  ‘transitive’ writer” ( écrivant ).34 Such a fact suggests 
an assumption that not all receptors become potential authors. That is, only those who 
managed to enclose themselves in “how to write” would be authors. In fact, the ones 
who do that are not many.
Besides such a statement, it is worth saying that there are, of course, intermediatic 
artworks in remix culture; however, the products mainly express redundant information, 
which maintains the quantitative and excessive fluxes of quotidian banalities.
The remix processes are considered as a phenomenon of democratic essence; however, 
we must not forget that its alleged freedom of action, that they propose or allow for, 
brings with them the articulation of other assumptions emerging from and inherent in 
the cultural dimension of society; more specifically, those who bring in their foundation 
the need to maintain information in a constant flow. Without being ingenuous, it is 
worth recalling that the sphere of art interacts (in a contradictory and nonantagonistic 
way) with other spheres: those of ideology, knowledge, and technique.35 In conjunction, 
art and those three spheres establish and give continuity to the cultural practices, how -
ever invisibly maintaining art not as immaculate.
Thus, creation in the context of remix culture sustains and prescribes the continuity 
of an entire process, nothing more than another and different step, created to ensure the 
maintenance of illusions. Nevertheless, the metacreation is now involved in a much 
more general process of digital reproducibility, given that everything can be recombined 
and replicated.
At last, it is important to highlight that the dominance of the role played by each 
agent—author, work, and receptor—is maintained by specific ideologies, which, in turn, 
support in different ways the vicious cycle of consumption of information.
Then, taking the procedures inherent to the metacreation poetics referred to in the 
previous section, I believe that to each intertextual practice (as monumentality, as dis -
semination and as continuity, respectively related to montage, collage, and bricolage) 
corresponds a given relation of dominance: whether of the figure of the author, whether 
of the work itself as an instrument of mediation, or whether of the figure of the receptor.
Considering that those three spheres are not exclusionary, in the digital metacreation 
processes inherent to remix culture, there is the dominance of the third one in which 
the notion of a dilution of authorship between authors and receptors is basically sus -
tained by information consumption. However, in those three typologies of image pro -
duction, we cannot deny the presence of a communication structure in which both the 
201
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTUREauthor-function and the reader-function emerge, overcome by image as strategy and 
instrument of mediation.
Metacreation in remix culture, undeniably and potentially, brings with itself new 
forms of intertextuality; however, it updates the traditional relation based on aesthetic 
and poetic assumptions, which, through history, sustains the artistic problematic of dis -
semination of authorship.
In the culture of remix, in frighteningly amplified proportions, the condition of dilat -
ing and broadening intertextual changes, whether through the flows and reflows of 
voices—author(s) and receptor(s) or texts—the image and all other texts from which it 
results, as well as all texts that may result from it. The dialogic resonance is then potenti -
ated in view of the growing emergence of new interfaces, as well as of the possibility, 
given by the character of digital media, of always showing themselves through the artic -
ulation of different forms, of hybrids.
Therefore, the immaterial qualities inherent to digital media impact in divergent ways 
in the context of remix culture. For some, those potentialities open new meanings and 
challenges to be incorporated in the sphere of artistic practice, for others, they are seen 
as destructuring.
Final Remarks
The logical passage of artisanal art to immaterial art allows us to detect the ontological 
principles of different types of image generations and also to understand what sustains 
the emergence of digital hybrids which are expressed as a polyphonic space, then built 
by processes of successive exchanges, which are almost instantaneous and funded by the 
continuous flow of information between production and reception. The specificities of 
digital media sustain the construction of a space-time of representation, which can be 
presented, at the same time, as soft and hard copies.
Not only the technological media ensure the quality of the response in a creation 
process, but rather the posture and meaning intended by authors and receptors, which 
must imply awareness of language before the media. In the metacreation processes from 
remix culture, the boundaries between art and design, creation and reception, and the 
self and the other show themselves undone. That fact reaffirms the appearance of an 
increasing number of trivial products that establish as simple entertainment.
The sensation of urgency inherent to the culture of availability separates the indi -
vidual from himself and places him, in an accelerated and reverted way, sometimes as 
subject, sometimes as object, sometimes as self and sometimes as other, inserting him 
into a contingency framework which reflects the hegemonic culture of technology.
If all cultures are made of ideologies and those are revealed through codes, what comes 
out in the present is, therefore, an ambience supported by a set of ideas and representa -
tions that bring to the surface a historic situation sustained by the reverberation of the 
notion that everything circulates.
In the culture of remix, the maintenance of the relations of continuity between the 
three agents of the communicative process—author, work, and receptor—is also sus -
tained by a process of superposition of ideologies over ideologies, in which the consump -
tion of information becomes a trading currency. However, we must consider that this 
entire communicational gear, maintained between these three elements, essentially 
refers to and amplifies the known concepts of low definition, opening to interpretation, 
intertextuality, dialogism, and open work.
202
M. TA VARESThe pastiche, replication, recombination, proliferation, and remix processes inherent 
to the logic of the availability are sustained by technology. This logic maintains histori -
cal and cultural processes which, nevertheless, potentiate the paradoxical cycle of over -
coming the indistinctive borders between formats, areas, and denominations.
Notes
 1 Julio Plaza and Monica Tavares, Processos criativos com os meios eletrônicos: Poéticas digitais  (São Paulo: 
Hucitec, 1998), 24–25.
 2 According to Bense, the text is something that is developed with language. Thus, it is possible to trans -
pose such assumption for the visual and sound languages. See Max Bense, Pequena estética  (São Paulo: 
Perspectiva, 1975).
 3 Simon Marchan, “Mixed Media,” in Diccionario del arte moderno: Conceptos, ideas, tendencias , ed. Vicente 
Aguilera Cerni (Valencia: Fernando Torres Editor, 1979), 336.
 4 Plaza and Tavares, Processos criativos , 18–19.
 5 Ibid., 211.
 6 It is worth mentioning that three categories of critical intertextuality—as monumentality, as dissemina -
tion and as continuity—proposed by Perrone-Moisés were the key reference to propose the characteriza -
tion of metacreation procedures presented here. See Leyla Perrone-Moisés, Texto, crítica, escritura  (São 
Paulo: Ática, 1993), 217–230.
 7 Decio Pignatari, “Semiótica da montagem,” Revista Através  1 (1987): 169–170.
 8 Claude Lévi-Strauss, O pensamento selvagem  (São Paulo: Ed. Nacional, 1976), 43–48.
 9 Umberto Eco, Obra aberta: Forma e indeterminação nas poéticas contemporâneas  (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1969).
10 Dick Higgins and Hannah Higgins, “Intermedia,” Leonardo  34, no. 1 (2001): 49–54.
11 Julio Plaza, Tradução intersemiótica  (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1987), 65.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid., 198.
14 Edmond Couchot, “La fin des medias,” in Art et communication: Actes du colloque , ed. Robert Allezaud 
(Paris: Éditions Osiris, 1986), 106.
15 Laufer and Scavetta consider hypermedia as a multimedia hypertext. See Roger Laufer and Domenico 
Scavetta, Texte, hypertexte, hypermedia  (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1995), 1–5.
16 Arlindo Machado, Máquina imaginário: O desafio das poéticas eletrônicas  (São Paulo: Editora da 
Universidade de São Paulo, 1993), 18.
17 R. L. Rutsky, High Techné: Art and Technology From the Machine Aesthetic to the Posthuman  (Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1999), 15.
18 R. L. Rutsky, “Information Wants to Be Consumed,” in Sande Cohen and R. L. Rutsky, Consumption in 
an Age of Information  (Oxford: Berg, 2005), 67.
19 See Stewart Brand, The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at M. I. T.  (New York: Viking, 1987).
20 Rutsky, “Information Wants to Be Consumed,” 68.
21 Ibid., 72.
22 Ibid., 74.
23 Rutsky, High Techné , 19.
24 I think that by following the credulous defense of the posthuman subject, we would be, making a refer -
ence to Robins, hiding nothing more than the individual’s dissatisfaction with the real world. See Kevin 
Robins, Into the Image: Culture and Politics in the Field of Vision  (London: Routledge, 1996), 13.
25 Rutsky, High Techné , 20.
26 José A. B. de Miranda, “Introduction” to Teoria da Cultura  (Lisboa: Século XXI, 2002), http://rae.com.pt/
jbm_cultura.htm#Introdu%C3%A7%C3%A3o.
27 José A. B. de Miranda, “O design como problema.” Interact. Revista online arte, cultura e tecnologia  10 
(2004), http://www.interact.com.pt/memory/interact10/ensaio/ensaio3.html.
28 Vilém Flusser, O mundo codificado: Por uma filosofia do design e da comunicação , ed. Rafael Cardoso, trans. 
Raquel Abi-Sâmara (São Paulo: Cosac Naify, 2007), 31.
29 Flusser, O mundo codificado , 157.
30 Cees J. Hamelink, The Ethics of Cyberspace , 3rd reprint (London: Sage Publications, 2003), 11–12.
31 Mario Perniola, “Cultural Turns in Aesthetics and Anti-Aesthetics,” Filozofski Vestnik  XXVIII, no. 2 
(2007), 39–51.
203
DIGITAL POETICS AND REMIX CULTURE32 Julio Plaza, “Arte e interatividade: Autor-obra-recepção,” Revista ARS  1, no. 2 (2003): 24.
33 Antonio Riserio, Ensaio sobre o texto poético em contexto digital  (Salvador: Fundação Casa de Jorge Amado, 
1998).
34 For deeper studies, see J. A. Cuddon, A Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory , 5th ed. (Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2013).
35 Robert Henry Srour, Modos de produção: Elementos da problemática  (Rio de Janeiro: Edições Graal, 1978).
Bibliography
Bense, Max. Pequena estética . São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1975.
Brand, Stewart. The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at M. I. T. New York: Viking, 1987.
Couchot, Edmond. “La fin des medias.” In Art et Communication: Actes du colloque . Edited by Robert 
Allezaud , 101–106. Paris: Éditions  Osiris, 1996.
Cuddon, J. A. A Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory . 5th edition. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2013.
Eco, Umberto. Obra aberta: Forma e indeterminação nas poéticas contemporâneas . São Paulo: Perspectiva, 
1969.
Flusser, Vilém. O mundo codificado: Por uma filosofia do design e da comunicação . Edited by Rafael 
Cardoso. Translated by Raquel Abi-Sâmara. São Paulo: Cosac Naify, 2007.
Hamelink, Cees J. The Ethics of Cyberspace . 3rd reprint. London: Sage Publications, 2003.
Higgins, Dick, and Hannah Higgins. “Intermedia.” Leonardo  34, no. 1 (2001): 49–54.
Laufer, Roger, and Domenico Scavetta . Texte, hypertexte, hypermédia . Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1995.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. O pensamento selvagem . São Paulo: Ed. Nacional, 1976.
Machado, Arlindo. Máquina imaginário: O desafio das poéticas eletrônicas . São Paulo: Editora da 
Universidade de São Paulo, 1993.
Marchan, Simon. “Mixed Media.” In Diccionario del arte moderno: Conceptos, ideas, tendencias . Edited 
by Vicente Aguilera Cerni, 336.  Valencia: Fernando Torres Editor, 1979.
Miranda, José A. B. de. “O design como problema.” Interact. Revista online arte, cultura e tecnologia  10 
(2004). http://www.interact.com.pt/memory/interact10/ensaio/ensaio3.html (accessed April 15, 
2014).
——. “Introduction.” Teoria da cultura . Lisboa: Século XXI, 2002. http://rae.com.pt/jbm_cultura.
htm#Introdu%C3%A7%C3%A3o (accessed April 15, 2014).
Perniola, Mario. “Cultural Turns in Aesthetics and Anti-Aesthetics.” Filozofski Vestnik  XXVIII, no. 2 
(2007), 39–51.
Perrone-Moisés, Leyla. Texto, crítica, escritura . São Paulo: Ática, 1993.
Pignatari, Décio. “Semiótica da montagem.” Revista Através  1 (1987): 168–172.
Plaza, Julio. Tradução intersemiótica . São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1987.
——. “Arte e interatividade: Autor-obra-recepção.”  Revista ARS  1, no. 2 (2003): 8–29.
——, and Monica Tavares. Processos criativos com os meios eletrônicos: Poéticas digitais . São Paulo: 
Hucitec, 1998.
Risério, Antônio. Ensaio sobre o texto poético em contexto digital . Salvador: Fundação Casa de Jorge 
Amado, 1998.
Robins, Kevin. Into the Image: Culture and Politics in the Field of Vision . London: Routledge, 1996.
Rutsky, R. L. High Techné: Art and Technology From the Machine Aesthetic to the Posthuman . Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1999.
——. “Information Wants to Be Consumed.” In Sande Cohen and R. L. Rutsky. Consumption in an Age 
of Information , 61–75, Oxford: Berg, 2005.
Srour, Robert Henry. Modos de produção: Elementos da problemática . Rio de Janeiro: Edições Graal, 1978.
20414
THE END OF AN AURA
Nostalgia, Memory, and the  
Haunting of Hip Hop
Roy Christopher
Individual memories once firmly rooted in places in the past now float free of historical 
context. Now, we share our memories courtesy of the mass media and its rampant repro -
duction of artifacts. Technological mediation does a great deal of its work by manipulat -
ing context through the replication, reproduction, and circulation of moment-events, 
what José van Dijck calls “mediated memories.”1 The media of the twenty-first century 
is rife with references to previous media in a manner unseen in previous eras. Samples, 
allusions, adaptations, remakes, remixes, copies, are all norms of media and art. Viewing 
the sampling of the hip hop DJ and the lyrical allusions of the emcee through the lens 
of Walter Benjamin’s “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction” and 
the tenets of cyberpunk literature, this chapter aims to illustrate how the mechanical 
reproduction of mediated memories has created a new nostalgic aura. I will start with a 
brief overview of these practices, connecting cyberpunk and hip hop to Benjamin’s theo -
ries, concluding with how advances in technology influence the process.
Welcome to the Terrordome
Looking at images from hip hop’s early days feels like peering into the future. The deci -
mated postapocalyptic scene of the South Bronx, the repurposing of outmoded recording 
technology, wild-style screen-names on every colorfast surface, the gloves, the goggles, 
the gyrating moves: an entire culture cobbled together from the detritus of past fads and 
fashions. Add a glimpse of Afrika Bambaataa’s Soulsonic Force or Rammellzee’s brico -
laged battle armor and one might think they were picking up the pieces after a complete 
global meltdown. The scene evokes a picture of a possible future, and that’s not to men -
tion the way it sounds when a booming breakbeat clashes perfectly with just the right 
horn stab or guitar riff, or when Professor Griff barks, “Armageddon has been in effect! 
Go get a late pass!” Welcome to the Terrordome.2
The sampling of previously recorded slices of sound, at first by repeating them live 
with two copies of the same record on two turntables, is an example of mechanical 
reproduction catching up with the cultural practices of hip hop, of technology catching 
up with what human minds and hands were already doing.3 With the spread of 
205
THE END OF AN AURAmechanical reproduction, as well as sampling and 
referencing as cultural practices, throughout 
media and technological artifacts, mediated 
memories are now mass produced, reproduced, 
and shared, their auras lost, their eras unknown. 
To most of us though, the sharing of mediated 
memories, of cultural allusions, bonds us and 
gives us a sense of belonging. A lot of this togeth -
erness is due to the technological reproduction of 
media. The digital reproduction of cultural arti -
facts, images, sounds, events, and moments has 
rendered authenticity irrelevant. Nostalgia runs 
rampant through our media. An empty past to fill 
with greatness unattainable has left context a floating concept.
Atemporal Minded
Though a dialog between social reality and its fictional futures has occurred since we 
started telling stories, mechanical reproduction has made the exchange easier, wider 
spread, and more difficult to discern. German critical theorist Walter Benjamin antici -
pated at least a few of the digital dilemmas we face in the twenty-first century in his land -
mark 1968 essay, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” Of all forms 
of art, music seemed to be the least of Benjamin’s concerns,4 but I find it difficult to even 
read the name of his most famous essay without immediately thinking of hip hop DJs. One 
seems to evoke the other so directly that such an analysis seems obvious.
“Time moves in one direction, memory in another,” cyberpunk author William 
Gibson writes. “We are that strange species that constructs artifacts intended to counter 
the natural flow of forgetting.”5 Thanks to recording technology,6 we live in an era 
when, as Andreas Huyssen puts it, “the past has become part of the present in ways 
simply unimaginable in earlier centuries,”7 and being made up of past bits of recorded 
music, hip hop is willfully haunted by its own ghosts. Even those apocalyptic visions of 
the future are specters out of time—they represent what Csiscery-Ronay calls “retrofu -
turism.”8 The shift from analog to digital production and reproduction only exacerbates 
the rootlessness of the artifacts produced.
These two forces, futures yet seen and the past reproduced, lift hip hop out of time. It 
exists in a floating atemporality. The vibe is an example of what Kodwo Eshun describes 
as a reversal of the avant-garde revolt “against a power structure that relied on control 
and representation of the historical archive.” Instead, “The powerful employ futurists 
and draw power from the futures they endorse, thereby condemning the disempowered 
to live in the past. The present moment is stretching, slipping for some into yesterday, 
reaching for others into tomorrow.”9
Modern music is inherent to Eshun’s Afrofuturism. He continues,
Afrofuturism approaches contemporary music as an intertext of recurring liter -
ary quotations that may be cited and used as statements capable of imagina -
tively reordering chronology and fantasizing history. Social reality and science 
fiction create feedback between each other within the same phrase.10See John Logie’s account of 
authorship in mashup and re -
mix cultures, in Chapter 21 , 
as he tracks the expanding 
network of contributors with 
legally grounded claims to 
have participated in the au -
thorship of a single, relative -
ly simple mashup.
206
R. CHRISTOPHERAs mentioned above, Benjamin anticipated these contextual conundrums. According 
to Benjamin, recording music makes it a commodity and gives it its exchange value. 
Once recordings become fetishized by collectors, the artifacts accrue their cultic value.11 
The basic argument of Benjamin’s essay stems from this shift in value. He writes that an 
original piece of artwork possesses an aura, a halo of authenticity. Mechanical reproduc -
tion, though it democratizes the experience of art, releases this aura.12 Over time a 
mechanically reproduced, mediated object evokes nostalgia, a longing for the original 
and its now-missing aura.13 I argue that the opposite is happening, that mechanical 
reproduction—especially digital reproduction—lifts recordings and allusions out of their 
historical contexts, resulting in a new aura.
For Benjamin, music was also atemporal, and memory and history were the same thing. 
Chambers calls memory “the skin stretched over the world across which desire, emotions, 
and expressions flow. Memory evokes the eroticisation of the past.” He goes on to say that 
memory is “sustained and guarded by language, in the record of images, words, and sounds,” 
and “Not only do we recall our past in music, but the very techniques that permit us to return 
there, recordings, are a form of inscription, of writing.”14 Writing, rewriting, citing, reciting, 
mixing, remixing—all of these practices involve sampling. Rearranging media into our own 
stories and memories is as normal as walking down the street.15 “Actually, of course cut-ups 
simply make explicit a process that goes on all the time,” William Burroughs once said. 
“When you walk down the street, that’s a cut-up—because your stream of consciousness is 
constantly being cut by random events. Life is a cut-up, by its nature. Every time you look 
outside the window, you’re cutting up.”16 A more normalized and mechanical “cutting-up,” 
such as that found in hip hop, represents a crisis of authenticity for Benjamin, a fragmenta -
tion that is “something simply lived through rather than meaningfully experienced.”17 I 
belabor the point here because this link, between music, memory, and nostalgia, as well as 
its disconnection with an authentic original are the basis of the new aura.
Cyberpunk and Hip Hop
Like hip hop, the science fiction subgenre of cyberpunk emerged in the 1980s. Also like 
the names for subgenres of hip hop (e.g., “gangsta” rap, “knowledge” or “conscious” rap, 
“backpacker” rap, etc.), the term “cyberpunk” came from outside the cipher. It was 
coined by Gardner Dozois to describe the writing of William Gibson.18 Writers such as 
Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Rudy Rucker, John Shirley, Lew Shiner, and Pat Cadigan, 
among a few others are widely considered the first on this new frontier. Though diverse 
in its diversions from standard science fiction, cyberpunk responds to a few key themes: 
the human body (i.e., “meatspace,” in contrast to computer network-enabled “cyber -
space”) melding with or being transformed by technology; the mass media; the subver -
sion of established, conventional wisdom; and globalization.19 With the release of 
Gibson’s novel, Neuromancer  (1984), and Ridley Scott’s film, Blade Runner  (1982), 
cyberpunk was effectively launched into the mass mind.
In 1994, Larry McCaffery wrote an essay exploring the historical ties between punk 
rock as a cultural movement and cyberpunk as a literary genre entitled, “Cutting Up: 
Cyberpunk, Punk Music, and Urban Decontextualizations.” Reading the piece replac -
ing “punk” with “hip hop” yields many of the same parallels. McCaffery writes,
What unites all of these artists is what might be called a shared “attitude”—an 
attitude of defiance towards cultural and aesthetic norms; an attitude of distrust 
207
THE END OF AN AURAtowards rationalist language and all other forms of discourse required by legal, 
political, and consumer capitalism, but which ultimately have the effect of 
distorting the individual’s sense of him-or-herself as an individual and as a body 
made of flesh; (therefore) an attitude that artists need not only to disrupt  the 
usual modes of communication but to find means of self-expression that is more 
“authentic,” less tied to abstractions, more tied to the senses and emotions.20
Cyberpunk and hip hop have been linked before.21 In the foreword to his subgenre-
defining anthology, Mirrorshades , Bruce Sterling defines cyberpunk by its meshing of 
previously asunder aspects of 1980s culture: “The overlapping of worlds that were for -
merly separate: the realm of high tech, and the modern pop underground.”22 He contin -
ues to reify the connection between cyberpunk and hip hop:
This integration has become our decade’s crucial source of cultural energy. The 
work of the cyberpunks is paralleled throughout 1980s pop culture: in rock 
video; in the hacker underground; in the jarring street tech of hip-hop and 
scratch music; in the synthesizer rock of London and Tokyo. This phenomenon, 
this dynamic, has a global range; cyberpunk is its literary incarnation.23
Mining the past for samples and sounds, hip hop hacks technology for self-expression, 
and, like cyberpunk, hip hop has a global range. Both are a part of a globalized network 
culture that decentralizes the human subject’s stability in space and time and in which 
the technologically mediated subject reforms and remixes ideas of body normativity.24 
Christopher R. Weingarten writes,
Sampling  . . . is a uniquely post-modern twist, turning folk heritage into a living 
being, something that transfers more than just DNA. Through sampling, hip 
hop producers can literally borrow the song that influenced them, replay it, 
reuse it, rethink it, repeat it, recontextualize it.25
Cybernetics, the science of command-control systems (hence the “cyber” in “cyberpunk”), 
defines humans as “information-processing systems whose boundaries are determined by the 
flow of information.”26 Technologically reproduced memories are problematizing more than 
just body normativity: McLuhan once declared that an individual is a “montage of loosely 
assembled parts,” and furthermore that when “you are on the phone or on the air you have 
no body.”27 Technology dismembers the body. Our media might be “extensions of ourselves” 
in McLuhan’s terms, but they’re also prosthetics, amputating parts as they extend them.
In his book on Public Enemy’s undisputed and sample-heavy classic, It Takes a Nation 
of Millions to Hold Us Back  (Def Jam, 1987), Weingarten draws a lengthy and effective 
analogy between records and the body, using samples as organ transplants. Tales of trans -
planted organs causing their recipients to adopt the tastes and behaviors of their dead 
donors read like the “meatspace” anxieties of cyberpunk:
A 68-year-old woman suddenly craves the favorite foods of her 18-year-old 
heart donor, a 56-year-old professor gets strange flashes of light in his dreams 
and learns that his donor was a cop who was shot in the face by a drug dealer. 
Does a sample on a record work the same way? Can the essence of a hip-hop 
record be found in the motives, emotions and energies of the artists it samples? 
Is it likely that something an artist intended 20 years ago will reemerge anew?28
208
R. CHRISTOPHERHip hop music is an artistic and aesthetic form similar to that of literature, and sampling 
is a similar practice to that of reference, allusion, and quotation in literature.29 Regarding 
European novels, Meyer states that the “charm” of quotation lies “in a unique tension 
between assimilation and dissimilation: it links itself closely to its new environment, but 
at the same time detaches itself from it, thus permitting another world to radiate into 
the self-contained world” of the piece.30 The use of quoting, or sampling, therefore cre -
ates “a new entity greater than any of its constituent parts.”31
Further conflating sound recording and literature, Peters writes, “The phonograph, as 
the name suggests, is a means of writing.”32 McLuhan stated that, “the brief and com -
pressed history of the phonograph includes all phases of the written, the printed, and 
the mechanized word”33 and Peters points out that the phonograph “is a medium that 
preserves ghosts that would otherwise be evanescent.”34 Quoting Philip Auslander in 
their discussion of haunting in music, Shaffer and Gunn argue, “  ‘listeners do not per -
ceive recorded music as disembodied’. Rather, he argues that listeners and performers 
fashion a ‘fictional body’ or personae when listening to music, an imaginary corporeality 
that is ultimately associated with a ‘real person’  ”35—living or once living.
The Ghosts of Emcees Passed
The hip hop artist’s practice of aural sampling and manipulation generates haunting 
sounds. Schwartz writes that sampling “ultimately erases the line between the quick and 
the dead,”36 and Peters adds that mediated communication via recording “is ultimately 
indistinguishable from communication with the dead.”37 On September 7, 1996, Tupac 
Shakur was shot as he waited at a traffic light in the passenger seat of Suge Knight’s car 
on the Las Vegas strip. He died on September 13. Six months later, on March 9, 1997, 
Christopher Wallace aka Biggie Smalls was gunned down in Los Angeles.38 The two had 
been embroiled in a media-abetted, bicoastal battle for hip hop supremacy, dividing the 
majority of the hip hop nation into two camps: East versus West.39 On April 15, 2012, 
Tupac’s ghost performed to a packed crowd at the Coachella Music Festival in Indio, 
California. The appearance of this apparition stunned and delighted those in 
attendance.40
Hip hop is haunted by a number of dead performers (e.g., Jam Master Jay, Guru, Ol’ 
Dirty Bastard, Big L, Big Pun, Eazy-E, Adam Yauch, Proof, Pimp C, et al.). Their 
ghosts continue to release records, do duets with living acts, and appear on magazine 
covers. Over a decade later, Biggie Smalls and Tupac Shakur are the two most promi -
nent of these ghosts. They are deities subsequent emcees must pay homage to by 
mentioning them, performing posthumous duets with them, or aspiring to become 
them (of course, having done a record with one or both before their deaths is the most 
respected position). At the end of the music video for his song “99 Problems,” Jay-Z 
is gunned down on the streets of New York City. The song is from his Black Album  
(2003), which was supposed to be his last release. Preparing to retire from the hustle 
of recording and performing, Jay-Z simulated his own death, imitating the high profile 
and unsolved slayings of Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls—two of his contemporaries. 
On the unreleased track, “Most Kings,” Jay-Z raps, “Hov got flow though he’s no Big 
and Pac, but he’s close  / How I’m supposed to win? They got me fighting ghosts.”41 
Much as Malcolm X had at the end of his autobiography, Tupac and Biggie anticipated 
their own deaths in many of their songs.42 Unlike Malcolm, dead emcees live on in 
the recordings of those songs.
209
THE END OF AN AURADerrida calls our obsession with recording “archive fever,” writing, “The archivization 
produces as much as it records the event.”43 Nowhere is our feverish archiving of things 
for the future more powerful than in digital recordings. As Robin Rimbaud aka elec -
tronic artist Scanner puts it,
Capturing these moments, storing them, and redirecting them back into the 
public stream enables one to construct an archeology of loss, pathos, and missed 
connections, assembling a momentary forgotten past in our digital future. It is 
a form of found futurism.44
Sound studies scholar Jonathan Sterne adds that the advent of sound recording main -
tains the promise of future archeology, writing, “sound recording is understood as an 
extension of the art of oratory—a set of practices that depended heavily on the persona 
and style of the speaker and relations between the speaker and audience.”45 Sterne’s 
analogy to oratory resonates with the emcee in hip hop. Indeed, George Lipsitz calls rap 
songs, “repositories of social memory,”46 but whose memories are they?
Inauthentic Memories
Nostalgia is often considered the longing for a time that never existed, the unconscious  
filling in of an empty memory with something better than now.47 These false memories poison 
progress in what Gibson calls the “corrosion of nostalgia.”48 Grainge points out an important 
distinction between nostalgia as a commercial mode  and nostalgia as a social or collective mood .49 
The former—what Benjamin referred to as an artifact’s “exchange” value—is often enabled 
by the latter—Benjamin’s “cult” value—as fans drool over reissues of long-lost demo tapes or 
posthumous tracks as well as reunion-tour tickets. With that said, the nostalgia that some -
times plagues hip hop is more about the fans than the music, what Boym calls “reflective 
nostalgia.”50 “A modern nostalgic can be both homesick and sick of home,” she writes.51 We 
want to go back to a time that never existed, to relive times we never actually experienced, 
what Torlasco calls “tertiary memory.” Infinitely repeatable recordings leave us with nothing 
but “the indexical trace” of themselves.52 “By replicating the work many times over,” writes 
Benjamin, “it substitutes a mass existence for a unique existence. And in permitting the 
reproduction to reach the recipient in his or her own situation, it actualizes that which is 
reproduced.”53 Benjamin argued that the reproduction of art democratizes its experience, but 
also that it loses its aura in the process. Others are more radical.
In his 1999 book Culture Jam , Adbusters Magazine  founder Kalle Lasn describes the 
commodification of personal interaction in a scene in which two people who embark on 
a road trip speak to each other using only movie quotations. Others have argued that 
our lived experience has been increasingly slipping into technological mediation and 
representation. Based on this idea and the rampant branding and advertising covering 
any surface, he argues that our culture has inducted us into a cult. “By consensus, cult 
members speak a kind of corporate Esperanto: words and ideas sucked up from TV and 
advertising.” Indeed, we quote television shows, allude to fictional characters and situ -
ations, and repeat song lyrics and slogans in everyday conversations. Lasn argues, “We 
have been recruited into roles and behavior patterns we did not consciously choose.”54
Lasn writes about this scenario as if it is a nightmare, but to many individuals, this 
sounds not only familiar, but fun. Cultural allusions invoke game play. They create a 
quizzical situation: To understand the reference is to be in on the gag. Our media is so 
210
R. CHRISTOPHERsaturated with allusions that we scarcely think about them as such. A viewing of any 
single episode of popular television shows Family Guy , South Park , or Robot Chicken  
yields references to any number of artifacts and cultural detritus past. Their humor relies 
in large part on the catching and interpreting of allusive references, on their audience 
sharing the same cultural memories. Hip hop, with its rife repurposing of sounds via 
sampling and lyrical allusions, is a culture built on appropriating cultural artifacts and 
recognizing shared memories. “That’s what’s cool about sampling,” claims Drew Daniel 
of the sample-heavy, electronic duo Matmos, “It transports the listener, if they’re willing, 
to move in that pathway back to a specific moment in time. So, it’s sort of like an 
archive of memories, of real experiences.”55
“The past is not the issue at all,” writes Klein, “it serves merely as a ‘rosy’ container 
for the anxieties of the present.”56 Lasn argues that this makes us victims of the corporate 
commodification of culture. For many, the sharing of memories and cultural allusions is 
a bonding agent, providing a platform for heightening a sense of belonging. A lot of this 
togetherness is due to the technological reproduction of media. As Benjamin writes,
technical reproduction can put the copy of the original into situations which 
would be out of reach for the original itself. Above all, it enables the original to 
meet the beholder halfway, be it in the form of a photograph or a phonograph 
record.57
Where such photographs and phonograph records are reproductions of scenes and 
sounds, respectively, those forms have given way to digital reproductions of both. 
Another layer removed lies in the manipulation of the digital to replicate its previous 
analog form. Their remediation represents a crisis of context when filters on digital 
photos make them look old and digital effects make recordings sound like scratched 
vinyl.58 The results is not only longing, it is evidence of the undermining of that 
longing.
Like Lasn, Benjamin also questioned whether mass culture is a site of exploitation or 
emancipation.59 He was equally concerned with authenticity. “The presence of the origi -
nal is the prerequisite to the concept of authenticity,”60 he writes. The empty nostalgia 
of our mediated memories holds no original and no original context.61 Benjamin 
continues,
The whole sphere of authenticity is outside technical—and, of course, not only 
technical—reproducibility. Confronted with its manual reproduction, which 
was usually branded as a forgery, the original preserved all its authority; not so 
vis à vis  technical reproduction.62
Simon Reynolds, who calls our obsession with reproductions of the past “retromania,” 
draws a parallel between nostalgic record collecting and finance, “a hipster stock market 
based around trading in pasts, not futures,” in which a crash is inevitable: “The world 
economy was brought down by derivatives and bad debt; music has been depleted of 
meaning through derivatives and indebtedness.”63 It’s hard to be a purist when nothing 
is pure.
Allusions work by mapping one context to another. By translating something from 
one context to another, a new meaning is brought to bear.64 As Siva Vaidhyanathan 
writes, “It gives the song another level of meaning, another plane of communication 
211
THE END OF AN AURAamong the artist, previous artists, and the audience.”65 All meaning is in some way medi -
ated by a mapping as such.66 The new meaning is dependent, however, on recognizing 
both the original and new contexts. Trow writes of television, “The work of television 
is to establish false contexts and to chronicle the unraveling of existing contexts; finally, 
to establish the context of no-context and to chronicle it.”67 Debord said the same about 
mass media, that it had no historical context, no stable memory.68 Now media has gone 
not only digital but also global via the Internet, the Web, and mobile technologies of all 
kinds.
Below the surface of these new media, distinguishing context is even more dodgy. As 
Clay Shirky writes, “Since all the data is digital (expressed as numbers), there is no such 
thing as a copy anymore. Every piece of data  . . . is identical to every other version of 
the same piece of data.”69 Unlike most analog media, there is no such thing as an original 
in the digital.70 With this in mind, Abby Smith emphasizes,
the need for preservation experts to develop a keen understanding of the con -
text in which non-object based information is used, in order to ensure capture 
of all the vital data necessary to meaningful retrieval. When all data are 
recorded as 0’s and 1’s, there is, essentially, no object that exists outside of the 
act of retrieval. The demand for access creates the “object,” that is, the act of 
retrieval precipitates the temporary reassembling of 0’s and 1’s into a meaning -
ful sequence that can be decoded by software and hardware. A digital art-  
exhibition catalog, digital comic books, or digital pornography all present 
themselves as the same, all are literally indistinguishable one from another dur -
ing storage, unlike, say, a book on a shelf.71
Analog media show their wear through patina of use. Books show “shelf-wear.” Vinyl 
records—even compact discs—display gouges and scratches. Scrapes, scars, stretches, 
tears, marks, and grooves: These are analog concepts. Digital artifacts black-box their 
wear, hiding their story and its context from us. Benjamin’s argument suggests that once 
mechanical reproduction gives way to the digital, art is entirely without aura. However, 
his argument is based on the artifact’s cult value rather than its exchange value.72 
Benjamin writes,
In the case of the art object, a most sensitive nucleus—namely, its authenticity—  
is interfered with whereas no natural object is vulnerable on that score. The 
authenticity of a thing is the essence of all that is transmissible from its begin -
ning, ranging from its substantive duration to its testimony to the history it has 
experienced.73
Benjamin was thinking within the bounds of ritual and tradition, which have less and 
less of a hold on culture in the digital age.74 The central lesson of the ruminations of 
cyberpunk: Technology is the opposite of ritual.
Conclusion
Viewing hip hop through cyberpunk illuminates its obsession with memories, its nostal -
gia for a time that never existed, its openness to the themes of modern science fiction. 
As Ted Swedenberg writes,
212
R. CHRISTOPHERIt’s a kind of soundscape version of the dystopian images purveyed in William 
Gibson’s cyberpunk novels and sci-fi films like The Terminator  and Robocop . But 
this bad future is now, as if the atom bomb or toxic catastrophe had hit the 
South Bronx or Compton.75
From the musical samples, lyrical references, recorded memories, and now rapping rev -
enants, the haunting of hip hop seems endless. If our art and artifacts are to have aura 
without nostalgia, if we care at all about authentic experiences, we have to be more 
mindful of the contexts floating in the media around us. Being able to translate data into 
meaning requires our attention on the banks it bridges. Authenticity comes from the 
moment we live in, from our experience, not from the objects we buy or their proximity 
to “the original work.”76 Like the Afrofuturistic feedback loop between social reality and 
science fiction,77 another exists between cultural artifacts and our mediated memories. 
José van Dijck writes, “Mediated memory objects never stay put once and for all: on the 
contrary, the deposits themselves are agents  in an ongoing process of memory (re)con -
struction, motivated by desire.”78 One should resist the longing for an original when 
none exists. Of all the things anticipated and invented in the South Bronx so long ago, 
a crippling nostalgia was not one of them.
Notes
 1 José van Dijck, Mediated Memories in the Digital Age  (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2007), xii.
 2 “Welcome to the Terrordome” is a song from Public Enemy’s 1990 LP , Fear of a Black Planet  (Def Jam/
Columbia), which AllMusic.com writer John Bush described as “a complete sonic apocalypse.” Professor 
Griff is Public Enemy’s Minister of Information.
 3 Bill Brewster and Frank Broughton, Last Night a DJ Saved My Life: The History of the Disc Jockey  (London: 
Headline, 2006), 267.
 4 See Rajeev S. Patke, “Benjamin on Art and Reproducibility: The Case of Music,” in Andrew Benjamin, 
ed., Walter Benjamin and Art  (New York: Continuum Books, 2005), 185–208.
 5 William Gibson, Distrust That Particular Flavor  (New York: Penguin, 2012), 51.
 6 See Keren Tenenboim-Weinblatt, “Bridging Collective Memories and Public Agendas: Toward a Theory 
of Mediated Prospective Memory.” Communication Theory  23 (2013): 91–111.
 7 Andreas Huyssen, Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory  (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2003), 1.
 8 Istvan Csiscery-Ronay, “Futuristic Flu, or, the Revenge of the Future,” in Fiction 2000: Cyberpunk and the Future 
of Narrative , eds. George Slusser and Tom Shippey (Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1992), 33.
 9 Kodwo Eshun, “Further Considerations on Afrofuturism.” CR: The New Centennial Review  3, no. 2 
(Summer 2003), 289.
10 Ibid., 299.
11 Patke, “Benjamin on Art,” 192.
12 Walter Benjamin, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.”  Illuminations  (London: 
Fontana, 1968), 217–252.
13 See van Dijck, Mediated Memories , 2007.
14 Iain Chambers, “Maps, Movies, Musics and Memory.” In David B. Clarke, ed., The Cinematic City  
(New York: Routledge, 1997), 234.
15 Some equate the two activities even further. See Michel de Certeau’s The Practice of Everyday Life  
(Berkeley, CA: The University of California Press, 1984), especially “ Part III:  Spatial Practices,” 91–130.
16 Quoted in Allen Hibbard, ed., Conversations with William S. Burroughs  (Jackson, MS: University Press of 
Mississippi, 2000), 92–93.
17 Richard Shusterman, Performing Live: Aesthetic Alternatives for the Ends of Art  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2000), 18.
18 Rudy Rucker, “What is Cyberpunk?” in Rudy Rucker, ed., Seek!  (New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 
1999), 315.
213
THE END OF AN AURA19 See James Patrick Kelly and John Kessel, “Hacking Cyberpunk: Introduction.” In Rewired: The Post-
Cyberpunk Anthology , eds. James Patrick Kelly and John Kessel (San Francisco, CA: Tachyon, 2007), 
vii–xv; and Rucker, Seek!
20 Larry McCaffery, “Cutting Up: Cyberpunk, Punk Music, and Urban Decontextualizations.” In Larry 
McCaffery, ed., Storming the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science Fiction  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994), 288.
21 See Mark Dery, “Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delaney, Greg Tate, and Tricia Rose.” In 
Mark Dery, ed., Flame Wars: The Discourse of Cyberculture  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994), 
179–222; and Kodwo Eshun, More Brilliant Than the Sun  (London: Quartet, 1998) for two early examples.
22 Bruce Sterling, “Preface.” In Bruce Sterling, ed., Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology  (Westminster, 
MD: Arbor House, 1986), xi.
23 Ibid.
24 See Rosi Braidotti, The Posthuman  (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013).
25 Christopher R. Weingarten, Public Enemy: It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back (331/3) (New York: 
Continuum Books, 2010), 38.
26 N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics  
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 113.
27 Marshall McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man  (Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1962), xxix.
28 Weingarten, Nation of Millions , 37.
29 See Richard Schusterman, “Challenging Conventions in the Fine Art of Rap.” In That’s the Joint! The 
Hip-Hop Studies Reader , eds. Murray Forman and Mark Anthony Neal (New York: Routledge, 2004).
30 Herman Meyer, The Poetics of Quotation in the European Novel  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1968), 6.
31 E. E. Kellette, Literary Quotation and Allusion  (Cambridge: Heffer, 1933), 13–14.
32 John Durham Peters, Speaking into the Air: A History of the Idea of Communication  (Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 1999), 160.
33 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man  (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), 277.
34 Peters, Speaking into the Air , 160.
35 Tracy Stephenson Shaffer and Joshua Gunn, “  ‘A Change is Gonna Come’: On the Haunting of Music 
and Whiteness in Performance Studies.” Theatre Annual  59 (2006): 44.
36 Hillel Schwartz, The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable Facsimiles  (New York: Zone 
Books, 1996), 311.
37 Peters, Speaking into the Air , 276.
38 Joy Bennett Kinnon, “Does Rap Have a Future?” Ebony  52, no. 9, June 1997, 76.
39 See Jeff Chang, Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation  (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
2005).
40 Hayley Tsukayama, “How the Tupac ‘Hologram’ Works,” http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/tech -
nology/how-the-tupac-hologram-works/2012/04/18/gIQA1ZVyQT_story.html.
41 Shawn Carter, Decoded  (New York: Spiegel & Grau, 2010), 98.
42 Mickey Hess, Is Hip-Hop Dead? The Past, Present, and Future of America’s Most Wanted Music  (Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 2007), 8.
43 Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression , trans. Eric Prenowitz (Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press, 1995), 16–17.
44 Scanner aka Robin Rimbaud, “The Ghost Outside the Machine,” in Paul D. Miller, ed., Sound Unbound: 
Sampling Digital Music and Culture  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008), 134.
45 Jonathan Sterne, The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction  (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2003), 308.
46 Lipsitz, George, “The Hip Hop Hearings: Censorship, Social Memory, and Intergenerational Tensions 
among African Americans,” in Generations of Youth: Youth Cultures and History in Twentieth-Century America , 
eds. Joe Austin and Michael Nevin Willard (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 405.
47 See Norman M. Klein, The History of Forgetting: Los Angeles and the Erasure of Memory  (New York:  
Verso, 1997).
48 William Gibson, “The Recombinant City: A Foreword,” in Samuel R. Delaney, Dhalgren: A Novel  
(New York: Vintage, 2001), xiii.
49 See Paul Grainge, Monochrome Memories: Nostalgia and Style in Retro America  (Westport, CT: Praeger, 
2002).
214
R. CHRISTOPHER50 Svetlana Boym, The Future of Nostalgia  (New York: Basic Books, 2001), 49.
51 Ibid., 50.
52 Domietta Torlasco, The Heretical Archive: Digital Memory at the End of Film  (Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2013), 92.
53 Benjamin, “Art in the Age,” 221.
54 Kalle Lasn, Culture Jam: The Uncooling of America  (New York: William Morrow, 1999), 53.
55 Quoted in Kembrew McLeod and Peter DiCola, Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 99.
56 Klein, The History of Forgetting , 11.
57 Benjamin, “Art in the Age,” 220–221.
58 See Mark Katz, Capturing Sound: How Technology Has Changed Music  (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2004).
59 See Paddy Scannell, “Benjamin Contextualized: On ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction,’  ” in Canonical Texts in Media Research , eds. Elihu Katz et al. (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2003), 74–89.
60 Benjamin, “Art in the Age,” 220.
61 See Eleanor Heartney, “Appropriation and the Loss of Authenticity,” New Art Examiner  (1985, March), 26–30.
62 Benjamin, “Art in the Age,” 220.
63 Simon Reynolds, Retromania: Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past  (New York: Faber and Faber, 2011), 
419–420.
64 See Gary Saul Morrison, The Words of Others: From Quotations to Culture  (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2011).
65 Siva Vaidhyanathan, Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity  (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 138.
66 See Douglas Hofstadter, I Am a Strange Loop  (New York: Basic Books, 2007).
67 George W . S. Trow, Within the Context of No Context  (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1980), 82.
68 See Guy Debord, The Society of the Spectacle  (New York: Zone Books, 1994).
69 Clay Shirky, Coginitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age  (New York: Penguin, 2010), 
54.
70 See Michael Betancourt, “1000 Days of Theory: The Aura of the Digital,” http://ctheory.net/articles.
aspx?id=519 and The RZA, The Tao of Wu  (New York: Penguin, 2009).
71 Abby Smith, “Preservation in the Future Tense.” CLIR Issues , 3 (1998, May/June), 6.
72 Betancourt, “1000 Days of Theory.”
73 Benjamin, “Art in the Age,” 221.
74 Betancourt, “1000 Days of Theory.”
75 Ted Swedenberg, “Homies in the Hood: Rap’s Commodification of Insubordination.” In That’s the Joint! 
The Hip-Hop Studies Reader , eds. Murray Forman and Mark Anthony Neal (New York: Routledge, 2004), 
581–582.
76 Mickey Hess, “The Rap Career.” In That’s the Joint! The Hip-Hop Studies Reader , eds. Murray Forman and 
Mark Anthony Neal (New York, NY: Routledge 2012), 644.
77 See Eshun, “Afrofuturism.”
78 van Dijck, Mediated Memories , 37–38.
Bibliography
Benjamin, Walter. “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.”  Illuminations , 217–252 
London: Fontana, 1968.
Betancourt, Michael. “1000 Days of Theory: The Aura of the Digital.” from http://ctehory.net/articles.
aspx?id=519 (accessed March 30, 2013).
Boym, Svetlana. The Future of Nostalgia . New York: Basic Books, 2001.
Braidotti, Rosi. The Posthuman . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013.
Brewster, Bill and Frank Broughton. Last Night a DJ Saved My Life: The History of the Disc Jockey . 
London: Headline, 2006.
Carter, Shawn. Decoded . New York: Spiegel & Grau, 2010.
Chambers, Iain. “Maps, Movies, Musics and Memory.” In The Cinematic City , edited by David B. 
Clarke, 230–240. New York: Routledge, 1997.
215
THE END OF AN AURAChang, Jeff. Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation . New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
2005.
Csiscery-Ronay, Istvan. “Futuristic Flu, or, the Revenge of the Future.” In Fiction 2000: Cyberpunk and 
the Future of Narrative , edited by George Slusser and Tom Shippey, 26–45. Athens, GA: University 
of Georgia Press, 1992.
de Certeau, Michael. The Practice of Everyday Life . Berkeley, CA: The University of California Press, 1984.
Debord, Guy. The Society of the Spectacle . New York: Zone Books, 1994.
Derrida, Jacques. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression . Translated by Eric Prenowitz. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Dery, Mark. “Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delaney, Greg Tate, and Tricia Rose.” In 
Flame Wars: The Discourse of Cyberculture , edited by Mark Dery, 179–222. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1994.
Eshun, Kodwo. More Brilliant Than the Sun: Adventures in Sonic Fiction . London: Quartet Books, 1998.
——. “Further Considerations on Afrofuturism.” CR: The New Centennial Review  3, no. 2 (Summer 
2003): 287–302.
Gibson, William. “The Recombinant City: A Foreword.” In Samuel R. Delaney, Dhalgren: A Novel , 
xi–xiii. New York: Vintage, 2001.
——. Distrust That Particular Flavor . New York: Penguin, 2012.
Grainge, Paul. Monochrome Memories: Nostalgia and Style in Retro America . Westport, CT: Praeger, 
2002.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and 
Informatics . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Heartney, Eleanor. “Appropriation and the Loss of Authenticity.” New Art Examiner  (1985, March), 
26–30.
Hess, Mickey. Is Hip-Hop Dead? The Past, Present, and Future of America’s Most Wanted Music . Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 2007.
——. “The Rap Career.” In That’s the Joint! The Hip-Hop Studies Reader , edited by Murray Forman and 
Mark Anthony Neal, 635–654. New York: Routledge, 2012.
Hibbard, Allen, ed., Conversations with William S. Burroughs . Jackson, MS: University Press of 
Mississippi, 2000.
Hofstadter, Douglas. I Am a Strange Loop.  New York: Basic Books, 2007.
Huyssen, Andreas. Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory . Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2003.
Katz, Mark. Capturing Sound: How Technology Has Changed Music.  Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2004.
Kellette, E. E. Literary Quotation and Allusion. Cambridge: Heffer, 1933.
Kelly, James Patrick, and John Kessel. “Hacking Cyberpunk: Introduction.” In J. P . Kelly and J. Kessel, 
eds., Rewired: The Post-Cyberpunk Anthology , vii–xv. San Francisco, CA: Tachyon, 2007.
Kinnon, Joy Bennett. “Does Rap Have a Future?” Ebony  52 no. 8 (June 1997): 76–79.
Klein, Norman M. The History of Forgetting: Los Angeles and the Erasure of Memory . New York: Verso, 
1997.
Lasn, Kalle. Culture Jam: The Uncooling of America.  New York: William Morrow, 1999.
Lipsitz, George. “The Hip Hop Hearings: Censorship, Social Memory, and Intergenerational Tensions among 
African Americans.” In Generations of Youth: Youth Cultures and History in Twentieth-Century America , 
edited by Joe Austin and Michael Nevin Willard, New York: New York University Press, 1998.
McCaffery, Larry. “Cutting up: Cyberpunk, Punk Music, and Urban Decontextualizations.” In Storming 
the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science Fiction , edited by L. McCaffery, 
286–307. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994.
McLeod, Kembrew, and Peter DiCola. Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man . Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1962.
216
R. CHRISTOPHER——. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Meyer, Herman. The Poetics of Quotation in the European Novel . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1968.
Morrison, Gary Saul. The Words of Others: From Quotations to Culture . New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2011.
Patke, Rajeev S. “Benjamin on Art and Reproducibility: The Case of Music.” In Walter Benjamin and 
Art, edited by Andrew Benjamin, 185–208. New York: Continuum Books, 2005.
Peters, John Durham. Speaking into the Air: A History of the Idea of Communication . Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Reynolds, Simon. Retromania: Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past . New York: Faber and Faber, 2011.
Rimbaud, Robin. “The Ghost Outside the Machine.” In Sound Unbound: Sampling Digital Music and 
Culture , edited by Paul D. Miller, 131–134. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Rucker, Rudy. “What is Cyberpunk?” In Seek!  edited by Rudy Rucker, 315–322. New York: Four Walls 
Eight Windows, 1999.
Scannell, Paddy. “Benjamin Contextualized: On ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction.’  ” In Elihu Katz, John Durham Peters, Tamar Liebes, and Avril Orloff, eds., Canonical 
Texts in Media Research , 74–89. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2003.
Schwartz, Hillel. The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable Facsimiles . New York: Zone 
Books, 1996.
Shaffer, Tracy Stephenson, and Joshua Gunn. “  ‘A Change is Gonna Come’: On the Haunting of Music 
and Whiteness in Performance Studies.” Theatre Annual  59 (2006): 39–62.
Shirky, C. Coginitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age . New York: Penguin, 2010.
Shusterman, Richard. Performing Live: Aesthetic Alternatives for the Ends of Art . Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2000.
——. “Challenging Conventions in the Fine Art of Rap.” In That’s the Joint! The Hip-hop Studies Reader , 
edited by Murray Forman and Mark Anthony Neal, 459–479. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Smith, Abby. “Preservation in the Future Tense.” CLIR Issues  3 (1998, May/June), art. 1.
Sterling, Bruce. “Preface.” In Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology , edited by Bruce Sterling, ix–xv. 
Westminster, MD: Arbor House, 1986.
Sterne, Jonathan. The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound Reproduction . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2003.
Swedenberg, Ted. “Homies in the Hood: Rap’s Commodification of Insubordination.” In That’s the 
Joint! The Hip-Hop Studies Reader , edited by Murray Forman and Mark Anthony Neal, 579–591. 
New York: Routledge, 2004.
Tenenboim-Weinblatt, Keren. “Bridging Collective Memories and Public Agendas: Toward a Theory 
of Mediated Prospective Memory.” Communication Theory  23 (2013), 91–111.
The RZA. The Tao of Wu . New York: Penguin, 2009.
Torlasco, Domietta. The Heretical Archive: Digital Memory at the End of Film . Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Trow, George W . S. In the Context of No Context . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1980.
Tsukayama, Hayley. “How the Tupac ‘Hologram’ Works.” http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/
technology/how-the-tupac-hologram-works/2012/04/18/gIQA1ZVyQT_story.html (accessed April 
18, 2012).
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity . New York: New York University Press, 2001.
van Dijck, José. Mediated Memories in the Digital Age . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2007.
Weingarten, Christopher. R. Public Enemy: It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back (331/3). 
New York: Continuum Books, 2010.
Williams, J. A. Rhymin’ and Stealin’: Musical Borrowing in Hip-Hop . Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press, 2013.
Williams, T. C. Losing My Cool: How a Father’s Love and 15,000 Books Beat Hip-Hop Culture . New York: 
Penguin, 2010.
21715
APPROPRIATION IS 
ACTIVISM
Byron Russell
It is imperative to those of us who see the true value of remix to articulate its fundamental 
importance. Avenues of self-expression such as remix are an absolute necessity for an 
inclusive, healthy society. Remix is an expression of who we are today and the world in 
which we live. It is up to our community to claim this validity, to defend remix against 
its detractors and to put forth a vision for a world inclusive of remixing practices and 
cultures.
In their most basic form, remixes are simply media created in part or in full from pre -
existing media made to be recognizably distinct from their sources.1 A remix is therefore 
something new, an original creation expressing the ideas and perspectives of its accred -
ited creator. The self-evident nature of this authorship engages critical perspectives the 
remixer may employ. Such critical remixes express a spirit that is fundamental to remix -
ing and its validity as creative practice. Critical remix is thus a metagenre of remix that 
includes all remixes demonstrating a critical perspective, whether that critical eye is 
focused on the source or elsewhere.2 Activist artists and remixing cultures have demon -
strated the limitless possibilities and potential that this form has, contributing to the 
creative and critical dialogs of our culture and validating remix as a meaningful 
practice.
Remix in the Media Landscape
Even as audiences fracture, mainstream media continues to dominate the media land -
scape as individuals find the same content through multiplying outlets and content 
providers. Moreover, mainstream media outlets still incite hysteria using the same sym -
bolic languages, tropes, archetypes, and patterns of communication relied on throughout 
the last century.3 These highly coded and controlled messages are also promulgated 
through means previously unavailable, such as Web links, affiliated channels, and social 
media to create a self-reinforcing narrative and 
worldview. Corporate media code their symbols, 
tropes, and archetypes to suggest values and pri -
orities and to convey legitimacy to specific mes -
sages and messengers while denying the same to 
others.See Chapter 28  for Nadine 
Wanono’s extensive discussion 
on détournement.
218
B. RUSSELLRemix responds in various ways to this 
onslaught of propaganda.4 Corporate media con -
vey their messages in highly predictable and rec -
ognizable ways, allowing remixers to play into or 
against these tropes, archetypes, and patterns. 
Remixers imitate such practices to momentarily 
masquerade as the dominant media, setting up a moment of insight as the illusion 
becomes transparent. As the syntax of media is unwrapped, deconstructed, and  
reconstituted, détournement can occur.5 The powerful images and associations used by 
corporations and governments are no less powerful when wielded to deconstruct their 
messages. In this way, a remixer can point to a trope, harness its power, reverse the mes -
sage, and stimulate a moment of insight, all in a single action. Remix can momentarily 
equalize, or even gain the upper hand temporarily in the struggle with a source for  
control of a given message. Explosive critical and popular results can thus be achieved 
by remixers from a position of relative weakness and obscurity.
Increasing access to information and outlets for finding an audience has fueled this 
empowerment. Remix embodies the ethic that all people deserve a culture that is read-
write and should refuse one that is merely read-only,6 to lift ourselves from passive recep -
tion to active reception.7 This is a kind of cultural resistance, in the words of Fatimah 
Tobing Rony, “a refusal to accept the passive status of spectator.”8 Remix, as a quotidian 
cultural practice is a way to decode and understand popular media and their modes of 
communication for both the remixer and the viewer. It can be a direct response to main -
stream media9 and to their sponsors, methods, and assumptions.
However, the validity of remixes remains to be recognized broadly and video remixing 
practices face particular scrutiny from content providers, governments, and a still-  
skeptical public. Misinformation and other obstacles obscure how creative, valuable, 
and justified such practices really are. Overcoming these obstacles is necessary to foment 
a reality wherein copying practices such as remixing can be truly validated as legitimate 
creative activities and vehicles for expression and criticism.
A common misconception is that any work based wholly or in part on existing mate -
rial is essentially derivative, and therefore devoid of creativity. Without experiencing 
remixes, one might overlook their value and meaning to the larger culture. Media may 
be viewed solely as products to consume, rather than as an integrated part of the cultural 
context in which we all exist and therefore have rights to. In this context, content crea -
tors and owners feel that losing control of an original creation to remix devalues it and 
weakens their brand. Misconceptions and false premises such as these must be addressed 
to build a lasting foundation for remix in the cultural canon of society. Asserting basic 
principles that can build a lasting appreciation for remix practices must become a part 
of this foundation.
Central among these principles must be the idea that remixes express not only the 
ideas of the sources used, but also those of their creators. Beyond this, remixes contribute 
valuable and necessary reflection and reimagination to existing works, providing new 
insight and deepening our understanding of them. Viewed in this way, even a highly 
critical remix burnishes and validates the original material as relevant to the greater 
culture, securing its place and enhancing its financial and cultural value. Copying for 
creating is valid practice and remixers must have a way to profit from their creations.10 
Without the right and ability to access existing media, a remix cannot be created. 
Finally, communities and cultural institutions must recognize remix.11 The Right2Remix.See Chapter 30  for Tom Tenney’s 
discussion of fusing a read-only 
culture.
219
APPROPRIATION IS ACTIVISMorg website articulates and asserts many of these ideas in a succinct manifesto focused 
on issues of copyright and intellectual property as they relate to remix.12
Remix and Authorship
Whether a remix is nuanced social critique with a pointed argument,13 or an apparent 
non sequitur,14 it is clear that the remix author is engaged in a dialog with the original 
material. Remixes thus exhibit authorship, critical or otherwise. Remixes can create 
an illusionary reality that temporarily disguises authorship by masquerading as the 
visual language of the source. Since the play between the source material and the 
remix necessitates the inclusion of original footage, a remix ultimately reveals itself in 
places where it contrasts with the source. By way of editing, the perspective of the 
remixer becomes apparent.
Once this authorship is recognized, it follows naturally that a remix represents a form 
of personal expression of the type described as a perspective, what Virginia Kuhn 
describes as a “digital argument,”15 and therefore an expression of media literacy.16 As 
with literary practices, the creator of a remix may operate in any style or format, address 
any subject matter and do so from any perspective. A remix may or may not express an 
opinion of its source or direct a critique at any subject, but inevitably expresses a per -
spective representative of its creator.17 Paul Booth suggests that, “if we look at remixes 
as decidedly pointed activities rather than just as objects or collections of samples, then 
we can form a more robust understanding of the cultural value of contemporary remix 
theory.”18
Remixers combine multiple sources, editing techniques, themes, and approaches, 
often in combination to achieve unique multiplicity of meaning and perspective. As 
Martin Leduc suggests, “Affective and critical relationship with mass media do not have 
to cancel each other out but can be leveraged in each other’s favor.”19 Remixes often 
contain literal messages and stories to create a kind of premise on which to place con -
tent displayed for a different purpose. There can be strong juxtapositions, ironies, para -
doxes, and even outright contradictions between contexts and narratives presented. 
Tangential or unrelated messages and confections may be inserted. References to other 
remixes, media, comparative constructions, and even self-referencing may occur. This 
variant multiplicity depends heavily on viewer awareness of the author, which is natu -
rally and conveniently self-evident in the remix, as Paul Booth suggests: “it takes the 
activity of the audience to intertextually reference deeper meanings of the texts to 
construct a mashup in all its complexity.”20
This awareness assists the viewer to consider the context of remixed media and to 
hold onto and allow multiple realities, and perspectives throughout.21 With its constant 
communication of authorship, remix is uniquely well suited for this multidimensionality, 
able to speak concurrently with literal meanings, cultural contexts, and diametrical 
viewpoints. Breaking the codes and context of consumption, remix possesses a critical 
dimension, constantly reminding the viewer of its unique perspective and engaging crea -
tive and social perspectives.
Defining Critical Remix
Remixes that directly engage this critical potential, “critical remixes,” are particularly 
relevant to the validation of remixing practices in general as they exemplify the spirit 
220
B. RUSSELLof remix and highlight the authorship all remixes possess.22 Rather than belonging to a 
subculture or movement, critical remixes share a common identity defined according to 
their basic nature. Critical remix thus includes works created by any individual or 
group,23 those intended for “high art” audiences, works that received permission from 
sources24, works in any format,25 and works that comment on any subject.26
To communicate in this way is to assert one’s claim to self-expression as described in 
Rip: A Remix Manifesto  by Brett Gaylor.27 Critical remixes engage the ideas and values 
our world presents to us in their original form. The power and purpose of remix can be 
seen in greatest relief embodied by the activist artist, waging a war of ideas against an 
overwhelming opponent, using the power of media to redress injustice, intolerance, and 
hegemony of discourse.
Critical remixes are a manifestation of this ethic and an embodiment of the value of 
a “read-write” society.28 It follows that those remixes that directly invoke this critiquing 
nature would be uniquely potent as they address the very nature of media.
Critical Remix and the Activist Artist
Critical remix can be endlessly fascinating in the hands of an activist artist, an individual 
motivated to deconstruct the assumptions, propositions, codes, and conventions wrapped 
up in the mainstream media to which we are all exposed on a daily basis. A typical political 
remix video, for example, distills a vicious détournement by placing the greatest emphasis 
on contradiction between source and message: in the words of Eisenstein, “Degree of 
incongruence determines intensity of impression.”29 Critical remixes addressing the injus -
tices of media itself are naturally powerful and abundant among this diverse landscape. 
Corporate and government power structures and their manufactured media identities  
created through advertising, official statements, and the cooption of news media by the 
powerful are frequent targets. Such practices may address gender issues in advertising,30 
political hypocrisy, attempts by Hollywood to make a scapegoat of religious or ethnic 
groups,31 or the right of individuals to create and reuse media.32
As remix has faced so many existential threats in its short existence as a practice,33 it 
is natural that critical remixers would have strong opinions, both politically and in 
regard to what or who might be included or 
excluded from the conversation. Nevertheless, 
critical remixes of all perspectives share a com -
mon identity as an embodiment of self-expression 
and the unique critical perspectives they contrib -
ute to our culture.
Remix Cultures and Futures
Access to remixing communities, and the growing body of theory and criticism fertilizes 
the evolution of remix.34 The more one observes remix production, the more it becomes 
apparent that remix cultures and practices hold the potential for infinite diversity in 
limitless combination, potential that transcends both art and advocacy, offering the 
promise of limitlessly fertile cross-pollination.35 Regardless of how or by whom various 
categories of remix may be divided, a common identity spans across genres and media 
types validating the sense of community and purpose that remixers share as well as 
affirming the works and perspectives of diverse groups and individuals.36See Chapter 40  for Jesse Drew’s 
discussion on creating his politi -
cal remix video, Manifestoon .
221
APPROPRIATION IS ACTIVISMThe relatively anonymous environment of online communities also enables creativity 
and risk-taking. Remixing ecologies foster successive treatments of a subject, resulting 
in a more fully realized exploration of a subject or theme than individuals working in 
isolation might achieve and in a much shorter time frame, as described by Kathleen 
Amy Williams.37 Remix can become a virtual hall of mirrors regressing infinitely, reflect -
ing our collective desire for an impossible totality of knowledge and self-awareness, the 
ultimate meta-meta-awareness.38
Remixing practices and cultures can be expected to continue to multiply and diversify 
throughout digital culture and remix will be at times familiar and at times wholly unfa -
miliar and unpredictable in nature, defying attempts to proscribe its potential. Remix is 
utterly fascinating, creative and open-ended. In particular, people with a fresh perspec -
tive will continue to find a voice through critical remixing. By hacking the messages of 
corporate media, critical remixes illuminate the power of technology and activism to 
give individuals a voice in the media landscape.
Critical remixes will continue to flourish and evolve as they embody a universal urge 
to express ourselves and to respond to the messages we are exposed to, striving to assert 
our freedom of expression. As corporations and governments possess money and power, 
their messages and media are omnipresent in our world. To respond in a meaningful and 
effectual way, we as individuals strive to match the medium and coding that they employ. 
If Marshall McLuhan was right that “The Medium is the Message,”39 then the medium 
must be the response as well.
Notes
 1 Eduardo Navas, “We Really Need to Rethink Intellectual Property,” http://right2remix.org/remixer-
28-eduardo-navas-we-really-need-to-rethink-intellectual-property/, (accessed August 5, 2014).
 2 Ibid.
 3 Berthold Brecht, “Der Rundfunk als Kommunikationsapparat” (The Radio as an Apparatus of 
Communication), Bjiter des Hessichen Landestheaters Darmstadt  16 (July, 1932).
 4 Richard L. Edwards and Chuck Tryon, “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen Empowerment,” 
First Monday  14, no. 10, 2009. http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2617/2305.
 5 Guy Debord and Gil J. Wolman, “Mode d’emploi du détournement,”  Les Lèvres Nues  8 (May, 1956). [“A 
User’s Guide to Détournement,” translation by Ken Knabb from the Situationist International Anthology , 
revised and expanded edition, 2006. http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/detourn.htm.]
 6 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York; Penguin 
Press, 2008), 28.
 7 Eli Horwatt, “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing: Contemporary Found Footage Practice on the 
Internet,” in Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Reworking, Transformation , ed. Iain Robert Smith, 
Nottingham: Scope, 2009, e-book. http://www.academia.edu/207383/Cultural_Borrowings_
Appropriation_Reworking_Transformation.
 8 Horwatt, “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing,” 84.
 9 Eclectic Method—The Colbert Report—Remix feat. Lawrence Lessig, 2009, YouTube video, http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=CvvhDngERXo (accessed August 5, 2014).
10 Navas, “We Really Need to Rethink Intellectual Property.”
11 http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/interact/participate/youtube-play (accessed August 5, 2014).
12 www.right2remix.org (accessed August 5, 2014).
13 Jay Sandler, “Star Trek on Why the US should Withdraw from Iraq and Afghanistan,” 2009, YouTube 
video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pea8wZqPKi8 (accessed August 5, 2014).
14 HowMagnetsWork, “Miracles (Magnets Remix)—Insane Clown Posse,” 2010, YouTube video, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ItrG8zFNPhQ (accessed August 5, 2014).
15 Virginia Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” in Transformative Works and Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/Remix 
Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0358. http://jour -
nal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/358.
222
B. RUSSELL16 Kim Middleton, “Remix Video and the Crisis of the Humanities.” In Transformative Works and Cultures  
9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. http://journal.
transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/349.
17 John D. Boswell, “Carl Sagan—‘A Glorious Dawn’ ft Stephen Hawking (Symphony of Science),” 2009, 
YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zSgiXGELjbc&list=PL77363C37932243A1.
18 Paul J. Booth, “Mashup as Temporal Amalgam: Time, Taste, and Textuality.” In Transformative Works and 
Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. http://
journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/297.
19 Martin Leduc, “The T wo-Source Illusion: How Vidding Practices Changed Jonathan McIntosh’s Political 
Remix Videos,” special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. 
http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/379/274.
20 Booth, “Mashup as Temporal Amalgam.”
21 Ibid.
22 Diran Lyons and Byron Russell. “It’s Critical: Ethical Foundations for Critical Remix Practice and 
Theory” for the 2010 Open Video Conference Theory of Remix Panel, 2010, YouTube video, http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=9F-zxvjgE7M.
23 Teamcoco, “Harrison Ford Angrily Points At Stuff’ Supercut,” 2013, YouTube video, YouTube video, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4Rqx9TvtlM (accessed August 5, 2014).
24 John Boswell, “Mister Rogers Remixed—Garden of Your Mind,” 2012, YouTube video, http://www.you -
tube.com/watch?v=OFzXaFbxDcM (accessed August 5, 2014).
25 Matt Williams, KQED Education, “The Personal is Political: Remix Video,” 2012, YouTube video, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=rHzWglZ79E4 (accessed August 5, 2014).
26 KTN Kenya, “Political Remix,” 2013, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiwi9RMFphA 
(accessed August 5, 2014).
27 Brett Gaylor, Rip: A Remix Manifesto , The Disinformation Company, 2009, DVD. http://ripremix.com.
28 Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy , 28.
29 Sergei Eisenstein, Film Form  (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1949), 9.
30 Jonathan McIntosh, “The Reel Grrls Remix Gendered Toy Ads,” http://www.politicalremixvideo.
com/2010/03/21/reel-grrls-remixed-ads/, 2009; and more recently, in 2012, “The HTML5 Gendered 
LEGO Advertising Remixer,” http://www.genderremixer.com/lego/ (both accessed August 5, 2014).
31 Jackie Salloum, “Planet of the Arabs.” 2006, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Mi1ZNEjEarw (accessed August 5, 2014).
32 Eric Faden, “A Fair(y) Use Tale,” Center for Internet and Society Blog at Stanford Law School, 2007. 
http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2007/03/fairy-use-tale (accessed August 5, 2014).
33 “Good Copy Bad Copy,” Andreas Johnsen, Ralf Christensen, and Henrik Moltke, 2007. A documentary 
about the current state of copyright and culture, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=WEKl5I_Q044 (accessed August 5, 2014).
34 www.remixstudies.org, Seminar Series 11 (accessed August 5, 2014).
35 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix.”
36 Ibid.
37 Kathleen Amy Williams, “Fake and Fan Film Trailers as Incarnations of Audience Anticipation and 
Desire,” in Transformative Works and Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca 
Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0360. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/
index.php/twc/article/view/360/284.
38 SuperYoshi, “Sango REMIX REMIX REMIX,” 2008, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=3GCU0vXCyWY (accessed August 5, 2014).
39 Marshall McCluhan and Quentin Fiore, The Medium is the Message  (New York: Random House, 1967).
Bibliography
Benjamin, Walter. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction . New York: Prism Press, 2010 
[1936].
Booth, Paul J. “Mashup as Temporal Amalgam: Time, Taste, and Textuality.” In Transformative Works 
and Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 
2012. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/297 (accessed August 5, 
2014).
223
APPROPRIATION IS ACTIVISMBrecht, Bertolt. “Der Rundfunk als Kommunikationsapparat” (The Radio as an Apparatus of 
Communication), Bjiter des Hessichen Landestheaters Darmstadt  16 (July, 1932): 259–263.
Coppa, Francesca. “Women, Star Trek , and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding.” Transformative 
Works and Cultures  1 (2008). http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/44 
(accessed August 5, 2014).
Debord, Guy, and Gil J. Wolman. “Mode d’emploi du détournement.”  Les Lèvres Nues  8 (May, 1956). 
[“A User’s Guide to Détournement,” translation by Ken Knabb from the Situationist International 
Anthology , revised and expanded edition, 2006. http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/detourn.htm, accessed 
August 5, 2014.]
Edwards, Richard L., and Chuck Tryon. “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen 
Empowerment.” First Monday  14, no. 10 (2009). http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/2617/2305 (accessed August 5, 2014).
Eisenstein, Sergei. Film Form . New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1949.
Gaylor, Brett. Rip: A Remix Manifesto . The Disinformation Company, 2009. DVD. http://ripremix.com 
(accessed August 5, 2014).
Horwatt, Eli. “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing: Contemporary Found Footage Practice on the 
Internet.” In Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Reworking, Transformation , edited by Iain Robert 
Smith, Nottingham: Scope, 2009. http://www.academia.edu/207383/Cultural_Borrowings_
Appropriation_Reworking_Transformation (accessed August 5, 2014).
——. “Remix and the Roulles of Media Production.” New Media and Networked Art History . August, 
2010. http://wiki.networkedbook.org/index.php/Remix_and_the_Rouelles_of_Media_Production 
(accessed August 5, 2014).
Kuhn, Virginia. “The Rhetoric of Remix.” In Transformative Works and Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/
Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. http://journal.
transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/358 (accessed August 5, 2014).
Leduc, Martin. “The T wo-Source Illusion: How Vidding Practices Changed Jonathan McIntosh’s 
Political Remix Videos,” special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin 
Russo, 2012. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/379/274 (accessed 
August 5, 2014).
Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: The Nature and Future of Creativity . New York: Penguin Press, 2004.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin Press, 2008
Lyons, Diran, and Byron Russell. “It’s Critical: Ethical Foundations for Critical Remix Practice and 
Theory” for the 2010 Open Video Conference Theory of Remix Panel, 2010. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=9F-zxvjgE7M (accessed August 5, 2014).
McLuhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore. The Medium Is the Message . New York: Random House, 1967.
Middleton, Kim. “Remix Video and the Crisis of the Humanities.” In Transformative Works and Cultures  
9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012.  http://
journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/349 (accessed August 5, 2014).
Navas, Eduardo. “We Really Need to Rethink Intellectual Property,” http://right2remix.org/remixer-28-
eduardo-navas-we-really-need-to-rethink-intellectual-property/, 2013 (accessed August 5, 2014).
——. “Remix Defined.” Remix Theory . http://remixtheory.net/?page_id=3, nd (accessed August 5, 2014).
Rony, Fatimah Tobing. 2003. “The Quick and the Dead: Surrealism and the Found Ethnographic 
Footage Films of Bontoc Eulogy and Mother Dao: The Turtlelike.” Camera Obscura  18, no. 1 52: 
129–155.
Williams, Kathleen Amy. “Fake and Fan Film Trailers as Incarnations of Audience Anticipation and 
Desire.” In Transformative Works and Cultures  9, special issue, Fan/Remix Video, edited by Francesca 
Coppa and Julie Levin Russo, 2012. doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0360 (accessed August 5, 2014).
This page intentionally left blank
Part III
ETHICS
This page intentionally left blank
16
THE EMERGING  
ETHICS OF NETWORKED 
CULTURE
Aram Sinnreich
One of the central themes of this book, and indeed of most research that focuses on 
emerging digital cultural practices and forms, is ambiguity . The sociotechnical regimes 
of the twentieth century, often discussed under the conveniently broad rubric of “mass 
media,” have broken down—undermining traditional institutions and economies and 
changing the discursive paradigm of mediated communication itself. When confronted 
with an anonymously produced, animated GIF combining the structure of a popular 
meme with recent footage of a celebrity dance routine and textual elements discussing 
the shortcomings of the latest smartphone release, posted to the comments section of 
an online video embedded on a social media page beneath an observational-critical 
comment expressed via emoji, how can we possibly reduce its significance to Lasswell’s1 
famous dictum that communication can be summarized in terms of “Who says what in 
which channel to whom with what effect?”
This discursive slipperiness is immediately evident when we survey the range of theo -
retical lenses that have been applied to the effort to make sense of such cultural prac -
tices. Leaving aside the “nothing has changed” and “everything is different” extremists, 
most scholars have attempted to describe the emerging field in terms of its own ambigu -
ity. Yet, even on this front, there is little consensus. Some theorists base their terminol -
ogy on the observation that the classifications defining traditional cultural forms  have 
blurred, and that these forms themselves are now amalgams of other media. Lessig’s 
“remix culture”2 and Sonvilla-Weiss’s “mashup cultures”3 are two such examples. Others 
focus instead on the fact that the cultural  actors  themselves no longer occupy fixed roles, 
but now fall somewhere in the gray area between our traditionally understood polarities 
of “producer” and “consumer.” Tapscott and Williams’s concept of “prosumption”4 and 
Bruns’s term “produsage”5 both share this vantage point. Finally, some theorists try to 
capture both of these dynamics in one pithy term; Jenkins’s “convergence culture”6 and 
my own “configurable culture”7 both walk this line.
The consequences of these ambiguities for social institutions such as the market -
place and intellectual property law have been thoroughly explored by scholars ranging 
from Vaidhyanathan8 to Lessig9 to Benkler10 to O’Reilly11 (though consensus has 
hardly been achieved here, either). A less frequently examined dimension of these 
changes, however, is the role that ethical systems  play in defining and regulating 
228
A. SINNREICHemerging cultural practices. Part of the challenge, as Boon has observed, is that the 
discursive ambiguity itself means that “there seems to be an almost total lack of con -
text for understanding what it means to copy, what a copy is, [and] what the uses of 
copying are.”12 A related problem is that the digital cultural landscape is hardly fixed, 
and continues to change at a rate that outstrips the pace of academic publication. 
Thus, Church observes that “remix” as a broad field is “a nuanced and evolving phe -
nomenon,”13 and Campanelli argues that as a result, “ethical principles governing 
online communities are also in constant evolution.”14
Because of these challenges, it is difficult even to know where to begin establishing 
the basis for an ethics of configurability.15 It would be optimistic at best and more likely 
fruitless to begin with traditional media ethics and attempt to mold them to the shifting 
forms and practices at issue in this research. A far more effective course, as Boon argues, 
is to recognize that “practice has its own ethics—and this ethics is worked out in the 
configuration of practice itself, and in relation to other practices and practitioners.”16 In 
other words, ethics can be observed in the way that people engage with and discuss digi -
tally mediated communication, rather than seen as an a priori framework against which 
such behaviors may be evaluated.
So what are people actually doing, and what can we learn about their ethics from their 
practices? Several scholars have made observations along these lines. Church argues that 
aesthetic  concerns trump traditional ethical considerations in the case of mashups: “the 
fragment of music that sounds the best with another is the one that gets sampled, irre -
spective of ownership or ethical issues with its appropriation.”17 Yet he also acknowl -
edges a separate value, “larger than whether a mashup is aesthetically beautiful,” tied to 
the “rhetoric of inventional choices  . . . that are embedded in the very idea of the 
Western liberal tradition.”18 In short, self-actualization through self-expression  is the 
paramount value in configurable culture.
Other scholars have identified additional considerations at work in the context of 
remixing. Lessig emphasizes the importance of innovation  within underground Japanese 
doujinshi  comic art: “the artist must make a contribution to the art he copies, by trans -
forming it either subtly or significantly.”19 Similarly, in her discussion of “borrowing” in 
both hip hop and academic writing, Chanbonpin observes that “the ethical and profes -
sional danger inherent in this type of production is that one who borrows too freely from 
the past may be merely copying instead of interpreting or innovating.”20
Another ethical value observed within these communities of practice is labor , or the 
amount of work applied to a given project. Discussing computer hackers, for instance, 
Lessig observes that they “like to challenge themselves and others with increasingly dif -
ficult tasks. There’s a certain respect that goes with the talent to hack well. There’s a 
well-deserved respect that goes with the talent to hack ethically.”21 In other words, the 
amount of skill and effort applied to the process of transformation is itself an index of 
whether the transformation in question is ethical. Something as easy as pressing a single 
button wouldn’t make the grade, but an elegant hack involving a novel or clever appli -
cation of code to materials would.
Finally, some scholars have observed that traditional markers of media ethics,  
including market behavior  and legal compliance , continue to play a role in the ethical 
calculi applied to configurability, though the traditional power relations  are often 
inverted. Grimmelmann argues that “the default ethical vision” of copyright occurs 
when “authors and audiences respect each other and meet in the marketplace.”22 In that 
context, he says, open licenses such as Creative Commons can be seen as “a challenge 
to the default ethical vision of copyright itself, not merely a critique of authorial 
229
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREbehavior made from within that vision.”23 That is, configurable practitioners don’t simply 
ignore traditional ethics, they seek to displace and revise them. Trammell provides a 
context for these challenges, observing that video game modders and fan fiction authors 
explicitly recognize intellectual property laws as an instrument of “exploitation of fan 
labor in the service of branded community,” and face potential liability for infringement 
out of resilience and resolution rather than mere ignorance.24 Along similar lines, West 
and Coad interpret “the resistance to both the introduction and the policing of copyright 
law in China” as the expression of a fundamentally Eastern ethic of individuality and 
authorship, and a philosophical rejection of the Western liberal ideal.25
To summarize, then, a range of scholars have observed a variety of different  
ethical considerations brought to bear by various communities of practice on the con -
figurable cultural forms they produce and reproduce. These include aesthetic beauty, 
self-expression, innovation, labor, commercial valence, legality, and power relations. As 
I will argue later in this chapter, these and a handful of other ethical criteria are consist -
ently invoked by the general public in their own efforts to develop a workable ethical 
framework for engagement with digital media and communications.
To return for a moment to the subject I introduced at the outset of this chapter, I 
propose that the fundamental ambiguities at the heart of configurable culture demand 
resolution, and that, in the absence of a legal regulatory system suited to the realities of 
networked media, individuals and communities have begun to develop their own ethical 
frameworks to distinguish between permissible and impermissible conduct, between 
good copying and bad copying. Consequently, much of my research in this field has been 
devoted to discovering and cataloging these new frameworks, and to understanding who 
adopts them, in what context, and for what reason.
The Ethics of Configurability: Survey Data
Though I addressed many of the ethical issues surrounding configurable culture in the 
course of extended ethnographic interviews with DJs and music industry executives,26 it 
is my aim here to share the results of two more systematic studies my coauthors and I 
conducted on the population at large, using a series of surveys. The first27 was fielded to 
1,779 American adults in mid-2006, and the second28 was fielded to 3,055 English-
speaking adults around the globe in late 2010. In addition to fixed-choice questions 
geared toward quantitative analysis, the surveys asked participants to answer open-ended 
questions regarding their general opinions of configurable cultural practices. These 
write-in responses were examined for the underlying ethical frameworks deployed by 
respondents to establish the legitimacy or illegitimacy of such practices, and then coded 
individually using an emergent open coding scheme.
In our first survey, seven ethical themes emerged from the responses, and these reap -
peared in the second survey, joined by four additional themes, which are marked by 
asterisks in Table 16.1 . The data present these themes, selected examples of quotes from 
respondents that span the poles of each ethical category, and demographic profiles of the 
respondent subgroups who employed these themes.
The first ethical criterion that emerged from our data was commercial  in nature. 
Thirty-eight of our respondents to the 2010 survey indicated that profiting from appro -
priated content (without paying for its use) is unethical. This emerging ethic diverges 
from the letter of copyright law, which considers most unauthorized appropriations of 
content to constitute infringement, irrespective of a for-profit or nonprofit intention or 
effect. Selected examples are:29
230
A. SINNREICH •“if the remixes are intended for profit, they should need licenses  . . . if it’s just for 
fun, then the artists should appreciate having fans out there who enjoy their music, 
and enjoy using it.”
 •“I think that if you’re profiting from other people’s creations then it should be 
treated as theft. Otherwise, I think it’s fine to use other people’s work.”
 •“As soon as the creator of the mash-up makes a penny having used someone elses 
materials as the basis for the mash-up they are stealing  . . . even if what is created is 
‘original’ and possibly eligible for it’s own protection.” [all sic]
Who are the respondents using this criterion, and how do they differ from the popula -
tion at large? A comparison of the means for the entire survey population and the means 
for respondents for this category (Figure 16.1) indicates a relatively small gender gap 
(106.8 percent male compared to baseline); slightly better education (103.8 percent); 
lower-than-average income (75.3 percent); low representation by African-Americans 
(84.2 percent); and high representation by Asian-Americans (150.8 percent). This was 
also the only category overrepresented by US citizens/residents (108.7 percent).30
The second ethical criterion that emerged from our write-in responses was adherence 
to legal regulations—specifically the notion, expressed by 118 respondents to the 2010 
survey, that permission from the owner or originator of a piece of content is a requisite 
element for the ethical reuse of that content. Note that some respondents actively 
acknowledged the functional limitations of copyright law, and identified open licenses 
as a viable solution to the mismatch between old systems of permission and new modes 
of cultural expression. Selected examples of such responses are:
 •“I strongly feel that unauthorized use of remixes and mash-ups are illegal and should 
be reported immediately.”
 •“doing without permission from the original owner is wrong.”
 •“I’m not personally a fan, but I can understand the appeal, at least from a creation 
point of view. I agree that the copyright issues need clearing up, and welcome the 
development of Creative Commons licenses, etc. to facilitate legitimate use.” [all sic]Table 16.1  Ethical dimensions for configurable culture
Unethical Criterion Ethical
For-profit Commercial Nonprofit
Unpermissioned Legal Permissioned
Pretension Authenticity Referenced
Unoriginal Innovation Original
Easy Labor Hard work
Bastardization Moral Homage
Rupture Continuity Evolution
Useless/harmful Use Value* Fun/beneficial
Ugly Aesthetic* Beautiful
Undermining Power Relations* Empowering
Meaningless Self-Expression* Expressive
231
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREThe respondents who embraced this ethical framework were the most similar demo -
graphically to the general survey base ( Figure 16.2 ). Compared to the base means, the 
respondents employing the legal category were the oldest subgroup (105.5 percent), the 
second-least male biased (105.1 percent), more educated than average (104.7 percent), 
of moderately low US citizenship (65.8 percent), and they had the second-highest 
income of any subgroup (88.5 percent). The ethnic breakdown for these respondents 
hewed close to the general survey base except for “Other” (137.7 percent).
A third ethical criterion that emerged from our survey responses was the notion of 
authenticity . A remix or mashup was deemed legitimate by these respondents if its creator 
acknowledged the influence of, or debt to, his or her source materials. Yet if a remix 
pretends to ex nihilo authenticity, it can be seen as illegitimate. Examples are:
 •“They can be dangerous when the viewer isn’t privy to the original referenced work.”
 •“Remixes and mash-up should be allowed with due acknowledgement to the origi -
nal work and author.”
 •“About remixes and mashups, as long as you acknowledge the original creator of 
item and do justice to his work I think remixes and mashups should be acceptable.” 
[all sic]Caucasian
Other RaceAge1 00.4%
106.8%
103.8%
108.7%
75.3%
84.2%
150.8%
103.8%
98.1%Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Survey Mean
Figure 16.1   Survey response means for commercial criterion (all graphics in this chapter 
courtesy of the author)
232
A. SINNREICHCompared to the general survey population, Figure 16.3 shows that the 23 respondents 
using the authenticity criterion in 2010 represented the second-highest percentage of 
male respondents of any category (117.6 percent male), were slightly more educated 
(103.6 percent), and were far less likely to be US citizens/residents, even compared to 
other categories (54.8 percent). This group also had the lowest mean income of any 
category (70 percent), and a relatively high proportion of African-Americans (137.9 
percent) and Asian-Americans (148.1 percent).
The next ethical value to emerge from our survey responses was innovation . Some 
respondents perceived configurable cultural practices as unoriginal and derivative and 
therefore illegitimate, while others viewed them as something new and “original,” and 
therefore legitimate. For many respondents, the premise of “original” authorship retained 
a prior, and therefore hierarchically superior, position relative to creative reappropriation.  
Selected examples include:Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race105.5%
105.1%
104.7%
65.8%
88.5%
111.2%
109.6%
87.3%
137.7%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.2  Survey response means for legal criterion
233
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTURE •“This should be considered theft because it is not an orginal work especially if he 
was using someone else’s music/voice and selling it.”
 •“i like remixes and mash ups less than the origanl songs.”
 •“Remixes and mash-ups are so cool! People with the ability to take a song or video 
that already exists and turn it into art are very inspirational.” [all sic]
The large group (118 of our 2010 survey respondents) that used innovation-based 
ethical criteria was predominantly male (111.7 percent compared to the baseline), 
more educated than average (104.3 percent), moderately low in US citizenship  
(68.5 percent), and had the highest mean income of any subgroup (especially given 
the significant non-US representation (89.5 percent)). Furthermore, Figure 16.4  
shows that respondents were exceptionally likely to be African-Americans (189.4 
percent) or self-described “Other Race” (181.3 percent), and unlikely to be Caucasians 
(69.8 percent).Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race98.5%
117.6%
103.6%
54.8%
70%
137.9%
148.1%
84.9%
140.5%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.3  Survey response means for authenticity criterion
234
A. SINNREICHAnother ethical criterion that appeared in both the 2006 and 2010 survey responses 
was morality , defined as the relationship between configurable content and its sources. 
A work that pays homage or does justice to its source may be perceived as legitimate, 
whereas one that disrespects, insults, or bastardizes the original may be seen as illegiti -
mate. Some specific examples are below:
 •“REMIXES & MASH-UPS ARE ACCEPTABLE AS LONG AS THEY DO NOT 
SPOIL THE FLA VOR OF THE ORIGINAL.”
 •“Sense of ownership is important. Acknowledging where the remixes and/or mash-
ups originated must be practiced at all times. It signifies respect.”
 •“Remixing is basically building on a creative work. But the one making them should 
always pay respect to the creator by acknowledgements.” [all sic]
The 39 respondents to our 2010 survey employing moral criteria (Figure 16.4) tended 
to be younger (95.2 percent of baseline age) and, unlike every other subgroup, skewed 
female relative to the general survey population (110.6 percent female). They had the Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race101.9%
111.7%
104.3%
68.5%
89.5%
189.4%
87.3%
69.8%
181.3%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.4   Survey response means for innovation criterion
235
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREsecond-lowest US citizenship/residency rate (52.6 percent), were relatively low income 
(77.2 percent), had a high representation of African-Americans (155.5 percent) and 
individuals identifying as “Other Race” (181.1 percent), and had the highest representa -
tion of Asian-Americans (250.6 percent) and the lowest representation of Caucasians 
(52.3 percent) of any subgroup.
Some respondents (34 in the 2010 survey) also reacted to the idea of configurable 
cultural practices within a larger historical context, using a criterion my coauthors and 
I call continuity  (Figure 16.5 ). The relative novelty of these practices was either 
bemoaned by some as an unwelcome break from established tradition (and therefore 
illegitimate) and viewed by others as part of an evolution of past practices (and therefore 
legitimate). Examples of these responses include:
 •“The remixes and mash ups are the good idea looking at the changing world but as 
a mother and very devoted hindu, has drifted my kids away from the meaningful 
world. I love changes but not to forget or lose my origin.”
 •“Remix songs, at least in my opinion be extremely important opportunities for 
young people to know the old songs.”Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race95.2%
86.7%
102.6%
52.6%
77.2%
155.5%
250.6%
52.3%
181.1%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.5  Survey response means for morality criterion
236
A. SINNREICH •“Personally I really enjoy myself listening to mash-ups and remixes, simply because 
they give a complete breath of fresh air (if made successfully) in things we’ve already 
heard or seen.” [all sic]
The respondents deploying the continuity ethical category in 2010 skewed male (112.7 
percent compared to baseline data), were the most educated subgroup (106.8 percent), 
were far less likely to be US citizens/residents, even compared to most other subgroups 
(57.6 percent), and had relatively high income (84.9 percent), especially considering 
the high non-US representation. Figure 16.6 also shows that this group had exception -
ally high representation by African-Americans (189.4 percent) and “Other Race” (234.6 
percent), the lowest representation of Asian-Americans (67.9 percent), and the second-
lowest representation of Caucasians (58.4 percent).
Another ethical category that emerged from both surveys was the notion (discussed 
in reference to Lessig,31 above) that labor  may determine whether an act of creative 
reappropriation is ethical or not. Specifically, easier mixes, mashes and hacks are insuf -
ficiently original to be accorded respect, while more challenging or taxing appropria -
tions may achieve legitimacy. Because only four respondents to the 2010 survey 
embraced this criterion, we did not perform a demographic analysis of the group. Some 
examples of relevant write-in responses are:
Caucasian
Other RaceAge 97.3%
112.7%
106.8%
57.6%
84.9%
189.4%
58.4%
234.6%67.9%Male
Education (yr s)
US Citi zen
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Survey Mean
Figure 16.6  Survey response means for continuity criterion
237
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTURE •“I think lazy is a word that covers their work. Like adding one letter in a scrabble 
game to profit from someone else’s ideas”
 •“Derivative works only become original creative content in their own right when a 
decent amount of work goes into producing something new”
 •“it is easy to copy someone else’s work or ideas when you have no talent or are too 
lazy to do it yourself.” [all sic]
The seven ethical criteria outlined above emerged from our survey responses in both 
2006 and 2010. In the later survey, an additional four categories emerged. One such 
criterion was the perceived social or psychological use value  of a given configurable 
cultural practice or form. Specifically, those deemed fun, entertaining, and useful were 
seen as legitimate while those deemed boring or damaging were seen as illegitimate. 
Some examples are as follows:
 •“usually they don’t hurt anyone so that’s when I think its okay. only if it was being 
used in a harmful way would it be not okay to use the copyrighted original work.”
 •“Remixes must be done for good cause of the society.”
 •“remixes and mash-ups should be used only for entertainment purposes.” [all sic]
The 86 respondents citing use value as an ethical consideration ( Figure 16.7 ) repre -
sented the second-youngest subgroup (92.9 percent of baseline age), showed near gender 
parity (106.1 percent male) and a very low US citizenship/residency rate (55.3 percent), 
and had a relatively low mean income (78.2 percent). The group had a very high repre -
sentation of Asian-Americans (162.9 percent) and “Other Race” (160 percent), and a 
fairly low representation of African-Americans (75.8 percent) and Caucasians (68 
percent).
Some respondents in 2010 used aesthetic  considerations as an ethical standard for 
configurable cultural practices, though aesthetics were entirely absent in the 2006 sur -
vey responses ( Figure 16.8 ). Artistic, beautiful, and melodious configurable forms were 
deemed legitimate, while those that sound bad and/or ruin their source materials were 
seen as illegitimate. Examples include:
 •“Sometimes the remixes are awful and if I would be original artist, I would not want 
my material sounds awful.”
 •“remix and mash up should be melodious and pleasant.”
 •“Remixes ruin whatever it is they are trying to redo.” [all sic]
These 18 respondents represented the greatest gender gap (118.6 percent male), were 
slightly better educated (103.9 percent), had a relatively high US citizenship/residency 
rate compared to other categories (76.8 percent), and were somewhat low income (79.2 
percent). As Figure 16.8  shows, this group had no African-American representation (0 
percent), very high representation of Asian-Americans (191.6 percent), and relatively 
high representation of Caucasians compared to other categories (80 percent).
Respondents in 2010 were also concerned with the  power relations  that surround the use 
and regulation of emerging cultural forms—a consideration absent in the 2006 survey data 
(Figure 16.9 ). Those who understood configurable culture to embody functions such as 
commentary, parody, and satire saw these practices as legitimate. Others elicited concern 
that such practices could undermine community or individual agency. Some examples are:
238
A. SINNREICHCaucasian
Other RaceAge 92.9%
106.1%
104.8%
55.3%
75.8%
162.9%
160%68%78.2%Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Survey Mean
Figure 16.7  Survey response means for use value criterion
 •“it was a good experience to see political parodies and local satires because that is 
what changes our world view and our thoughts. it gets the politican more con -
science about our feelings and tries to hone in our concerns more appropriately.”
 •“It should not be created to hurt any community or any person’s personal life and 
his/her privacy.”
 •“Knowlegde is power and should be shared together.” [all sic]
This group of 30 respondents was the second oldest subgroup (105.1 percent), exhibited 
a significant gender gap (112.7 percent male), and was slightly more educated (103.9 
percent) than general survey respondents (Figure 16.9). This group also had the highest 
US citizenship/residency rate—the only category to exceed the baseline (110.9 per -
cent). It also earned the highest income—the only category to exceed baseline (113.9 
percent). The ethnic makeup of this subgroup hewed close to the overall survey—except 
for very low Asian-American representation (37.4 percent) and moderately high ‘Other 
Race’ (137 percent).
The final new ethical category to emerge from the 2010 survey results was based on 
the premise that configurable cultural practices enable self-expression , and therefore carry 
an inherent ethical legitimacy (Figure 16.10). Conversely, respondents who saw these 
239
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREemerging forms as meaningless or unexpressive had reservations about their legitimacy. 
Examples of both perspectives are included:
 •“Remixes and mash-ups sound like something that people with way too much time 
on their hands would do.”
 •“i think remixes and mash ups are an idea, for people who don’t know how to make 
music, to make music, but if the goal of a remix or a mash up is to make a point 
about a subject than i consider it to be important.”
 •“It’s a great way to express yourself and your individuality.” [all sic]
Compared to the baseline survey averages, this subgroup ( Figure 16.10 ) was the youngest 
by far (76 percent), had the greatest gender parity of any subgroup (102.5 percent male), 
had the lowest US citizenship/residency rate by far (46.1 percent), and earned the  
second-lowest income of any category (73.5 percent). The group had an extremely high 
representation of African-Americans (275.5 percent) and “Other Race” (240.8 per -
cent), as well as the lowest representation of Caucasians of any category (41.2 percent) 
(Figure 16.10 ).Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race101.4%
118.6%
103.9%
76.8%
79.2%
0%
191.6%
80%
155.8%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.8  Survey response means for aesthetic criterion
240
A. SINNREICHOld Laws, New Ethics
T wo decades after the development of the World Wide Web and the resulting emer -
gence of the Internet as a global platform for the creation and dissemination of new, 
configurable cultural forms and practices, our legal and regulatory apparatuses are still 
hopelessly mired in the expectations, economics, and ethical frameworks of the mass 
media era.32 This disjuncture has arguably hindered cultural innovation; as Kafai, et al. 
argue, lack of participation in online communities “may very well be tied to the ethical 
issues associated with the remixing process so commonly used to create content” in such 
communities.33 Yet, despite (or because of) these institutional inadequacies and the 
social problems they may engender, people who are not lawyers are developing their own 
ethical frameworks to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate uses of reappropri -
ated work in their cultural environments.
These emerging ethical criteria draw in part on preexisting cultural premises from a 
range of social, economic, and moral systems, which potentially lessens the relative 
importance of an ethical framework rooted in copyright law per se. That said, legality Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race105.1%
112.7%
103.9%
110.9%
113.9%
104.5%
37.4%
99.6%
137%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.9  Survey response means for power relation criterion
241
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREremains a central element of respondents’ overall ethical calculus; permission-based 
criteria, which are closest to the letter of copyright law, were among the most frequently 
cited. Similarly, moral rights, which exist in several non-US copyright systems (as dis -
cussed by Geller,34 Kwall,35 and Smiers and van Schijndel36), were far more likely to be 
cited by non-US citizens than by Americans.
While much has been written about the distinctions between “digital natives,” who 
have been acculturated to information communication technologies (ICTs) and net -
worked culture, and their elders and less fortunate contemporaries who have not (see, 
for instance, Palfrey and Gasser37 or Prensky38), our analyses suggest that age is only one 
of many factors influencing ethics and attitudes about digital culture—and that it plays 
a far less significant role than either ethnicity or nationality. This point has significant 
policy implications. As the total population of Internet users continues to age, any 
reflexive assumption of a correlation between youth culture and digital culture, or the 
expectation that youth “lead the way” in the adoption and cultural assimilation of ICTs, 
may risk obscuring other, more important socioeconomic factors and may contribute to 
policies and investments that are biased against older users.Age
Male
Education (yr s)
US Citiz en
Income
African-Amer ican
Asian-Amer ican
Caucasian
Other Race76%
102.5%
108.1%
46.1%
73.5%
275.5%
131.6%
41.2%
240.8%
Survey Mean
Figure 16.10   Survey response means for self-expression criterion
242
A. SINNREICHThough age is a factor in awareness, practices, and even attitudes regarding the overall 
legitimacy of configurable practices, there were no considerable age distinctions between 
most ethical categories. In fact, the average age of the categories typically hovered very 
close to the average age of all survey respondents (~40 years). This indicates that the 
different emerging ethical frameworks are not cohort-based, but rather are rooted in 
geographic and ethnic communities—in other words, preexisting ethical systems from 
around the world are being applied, in different ways, to this common emerging set of 
cultural practices. This finding is important because configurable culture is a global, and 
globalizing, phenomenon. Of course, the commonalities of these global practices do not 
erase demographic differences altogether.
Indeed, the survey research indicates that national differences are important in this 
context. For instance, the fact that US citizens represent a far greater percentage of 
commercial and power relations evaluators relative to other ethical frameworks (by a 
ratio of more than two to one with respect to authenticity, morality, and self-expression) 
reflects the differing models for broader cultural legitimacy in the United States and 
elsewhere.
The recent appearance of power relations as an ethical category in 2010, after being 
absent in 2006, is also significant. It shows, as Lessig39 and others have argued, that the 
rapid propertization of culture is beginning to provoke mainstream backlash and aware -
ness of the inadequacies and inequities of copyright law in its current form. This is 
exacerbated by the rapid expansion of configurable culture, which makes those inade -
quacies and inequities far more evident because of their immunity to traditional catego -
rization. The fact that this ethical category skews most toward US citizens conforms to 
this analysis, as the United States is the epicenter of cultural propertization and the 
engine of most maximalist copyright policy around the globe.40
The ethnic differences between respondents in different categories are also very telling.  
Like the national differences, they suggest that preexisting ethical systems tied to net -
works based on religion, heritage, and other ethnically skewed factors play a large role 
in determining how people make sense of the ethics of configurability—in short, that 
old networks help to determine the rules of engagement on new networks.
Finally, the self-expression criterion, which is a new addition in the 2010 survey data, 
is the greatest anomaly. It skews very young, international, and nonwhite. This suggests 
the spirit of global youth at work, and perhaps even the development of a new, global 
vision of networked individuality, augmenting and supplanting the Western liberal 
ideal. These data may indicate that we are coming to see configurable cultural participa -
tion as a fundamental civil liberty—in the words of Boon, that “the right to copy, and 
to transform ourselves and our environment through copying, is a political issue in ways 
that go far beyond intellectual-property law.”41
It is not my aim to advocate for the superiority or legitimacy of one of these ethical 
frameworks compared to another, or to suggest that each demographic group be allowed 
to pick and choose its own laws, but rather to observe that these frameworks have arisen 
in the absence of a robust and adaptive legal regulatory apparatus, and often in contra -
distinction to the letter of copyright law itself. If intellectual property can be amended 
to suit the new cultural realities of a digital, networked, globalized media environment, 
careful examination of these emerging frameworks will be a necessary first step in ensur -
ing that norms, laws, and ethics are effectively reconciled, and that cultural innovation 
can proceed without the categorical criminalization of mainstream cultural 
participation.
243
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTUREOne particular element of our current intellectual property landscape that bears spe -
cial scrutiny in this context is the recent move toward “harmonization” of intellectual 
property laws and regulations across national boundaries (see Benkler,42 Brown,43 
Crews,44 Long,45and Sinnreich46). As the survey responses suggest, this process obscures 
very real differences in the attitudes of different nationalities and ethnicities regarding 
the appropriate borderline between legitimate and illegitimate uses of cultural property, 
as well as the variant methods by which this line is established. To suggest, as the logic 
of harmonization does, that one legal framework is equally optimal in all countries and 
contexts is to risk introducing a form of bias into cultural regulation that privileges the 
needs and attitudes of some demographics and nationalities over those of others. 
Specifically, the existing legal apparatus most closely fits ethical frameworks dispropor -
tionately embraced by white Americans, and may therefore be critiqued as an instru -
ment of hegemonic power.
Thus, we must view today’s battles over intellectual property on the Internet, and the 
broader range of debates over the scope of “Internet freedom,” as a collective effort to 
reconcile our disparate and emerging ethical systems with the regulatory legacy of a 
bygone technological, social, and political era. The methods we employ to address these 
concerns and to rectify these disjunctures will serve as both an indicator and an instru -
ment of evolving cultural power relations around the globe.
Notes
 1 Harold D. Lasswell. “The Structure and Function of Communication in Society.” In The Communication 
of Ideas , ed. Lyman Bryson (New York: Harper, 1948), 37.
 2 Lawrence Lessig. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York: Penguin, 
2008).
 3 Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, ed. Mashup Cultures  (New York: Springer, 2010).
 4 Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams. Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything  
(New York: Penguin, 2006).
 5 Axel Bruns. Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life and Beyond: From Production to Produsage  (New York: Peter 
Lang).
 6 Henry Jenkins. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide  (New York: New York University 
Press, 2006).
 7 Aram Sinnreich. Mashed Up: Music, Technology and the Rise of Configurable Culture  (Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010).
 8 Siva Vaidhyanathan. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity  (New York: New York University Press, 2001).
 9 Lawrence Lessig Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Creativity  
(New York: Penguin Press, 2004).
10 Yochai Benkler. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom  
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006).
11 Tim O’Reilly. What is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software  
(Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly Media, 2009).
12 Marcus Boon. In Praise of Copying  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press), 6.
13 Scott H. Church. “All Living Things are DJs: Rhetoric, Aesthetics, and Remix Culture.” (PhD disserta -
tion, University of Nebraska, 2013), 68.
14 Vito Campanelli. “Remix Ethics.” International Review of Information Ethics  15 (2011): 26.
15 Per the above discussion regarding nomenclature, I will continue to use the “configurable culture” frame -
work I outlined in previous publications.
16 Boon, In Praise of Copying , 247.
17 Church, “All Living Things,” 86.
18 Ibid., 143.
19 Lessig, Free Culture , 25–26.
244
A. SINNREICH20 Kim D. Chanbonpin. “Legal Writing, the Remix: Plagiarism and Hip Hop Ethics.” Mercer Law Review  63 
(2011): 598.
21 Lessig, Free Culture , 154.
22 James Grimmelmann. “Ethical Visions of Copyright Law.” The Fordham Law Review  77, no. 5 (2009), 2014.
23 Grimmelmann, “Ethical Visions,” 2035.
24 Aaron Trammell. “Magic Modders: Alter Art, Ambiguity, and the Ethics of Prosumption.” Journal for 
Virtual Worlds Research  6 (2013), 5.
25 Patrick Leslie West and Cher Coad. “Drawing the Line: Chinese Calligraphy, Cultural Materialisms and 
the ‘Remixing of Remix.’” M/C Journal  16 (2013).
26 Sinnreich, Mashed Up .
27 Aram Sinnreich, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck. “Ethics Reconfigured: How Today’s Media 
Consumers Evaluate the Role of Creative Reappropriation.” Information, Communication & Society  12 
(2009), 1242–1260.
28 Mark Latonero and Aram Sinnreich. “The Hidden Demography of New Media Ethics.” Information, 
Communication & Society  17, no. 4 (2014): 572–593.
29 I have declined to correct the spelling and grammatical errors in the original data, in order to provide as 
transparent a representation of respondents’ communications as possible.
30 It is important to point out that, on the whole, the base of respondents who reported using any ethical 
criteria at all in the 2010 survey were less likely to be US citizens, lower-income, better educated, and 
more likely to be male than the overall survey population. Given this general trend, there was still sig -
nificant variation between the populations embracing each ethical framework.
31 Lessig, Free Culture .
32 This is a subject I examine at great length in my book The Piracy Crusade .
33 Yasmin B. Kafai, William Q. Burke, and Deborah A. Fields. “What Videogame Making Can Teach Us 
About Access and Ethics in Participatory Culture.” In Breaking New Ground: Innovation in Games, Play, 
Practice and Theory  (Proceedings of DiGRA), 2009, 8.
34 Paul Geller. “Copyright History and the Future: What’s Culture Got to Do With It?” Journal of the 
Copyright Society of the USA  47 (2000), 209.
35 Roberta Rosenthal Kwall. The Soul of Creativity: Forging a Moral Rights Law for the United States  (Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press 2010).
36 Joost Smiers and Marieke van Schijndel. Imagine There Is No Copyright and No Cultural Conglomerate Too  
(Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2009).
37 John Gorham Palfrey and Urs Gasser. Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives  
(New York: Basic Books, 2008).
38 Marc Prensky. “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants.” in Cross Currents: Cultures, Communities, 
Technologies , ed. Kris Blair, Robin Murphy, and Jen Almjeld (Boston, MA: Wadsworth, 2014), 45–51.
39 Lessig, Free Culture .
40 Peter Drahos and John Braithwaite, Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy?  (London: 
Earthscan Publications, 2002).
41 Boon, In Praise of Copying , 104.
42 Benkler, Wealth of Networks .
43 Michael F . Brown. “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?” Current Anthropology  39 (1998), 193–222.
44 Kenneth D. Crews. “Harmonization and the Goals of Copyright: Property Rights or Cultural Progress?” 
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies  6 (1998), 117–138.
45 Doris E. Long. “Dissonant Harmonization: Limitations on ‘Cash n’ Carry’ Creativity,” Albany Law Review  
70 (2007), 1163–1205.
46 Aram Sinnreich. The Piracy Crusade: How the Music Industry’s War on Sharing Destroys Markets and Erodes 
Civil Liberties  (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2013).
Bibliography
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Boon, Marcus. In Praise of Copying . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Brown, Michael F . “Can Culture Be Copyrighted?” Current Anthropology 39 (1998): 193–222.
Bruns, Axel. Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life, and Beyond: From Production to Produsage . New York:  
Peter Lang, 2008.
245
THE EMERGING ETHICS OF NETWORKED CULTURECampanelli, Vito. “Remix Ethics.” International Review of Information Ethics  15 (2011): 24–32.
Chanbonpin, Kim. D. “Legal Writing, the Remix: Plagiarism and Hip Hop Ethics .” Mercer Law Review  
63 (2011): 597–638.
Church, Scott H. “All Living Things Are DJs: Rhetoric, Aesthetics, and Remix Culture.” PhD 
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2013.
Crews, Kenneth D. “Harmonization and the Goals of Copyright: Property Rights or Cultural Progress?” 
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 6 (1998): 117–138.
Drahos, Peter, and John Braithwaite. Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy?  
London: Earthscan Publications, 2002.
Geller, Paul. “Copyright History and the Future: What’s Culture Got to Do with It?” Journal of the 
Copyright Society of the USA  47 (2000): 209–264.
Grimmelmann, James. “Ethical Visions of Copyright Law,” Fordham Law Review  77, no. 5 (2009): 
2005–2037.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York University: 
Press, 2006.
Kafai, Yasmine. B., William Q. Burke, and Deborah A. Fields. “What Videogame Making Can Teach 
Us About Access and Ethics in Participatory Culture.” Breaking New Ground: Innovation in Games, 
Play, Practice and Theory . Proceedings of DiGRA (2009).
Kwall, Roberta Rostenthal. The Soul of Creativity: Forging a Moral Rights Law for the United States . 
Stanford, CA: Stanford Law Books, 2009.
Lasswell, Harold D. “The Structure and Function of Communication in Society.” In The Communication 
of Ideas , edited by Lyman Bryson. New York: Harper, 1948.
Latonero, Mark, and Aram Sinnreich. “The Hidden Demography of New Media Ethics.” Information, 
Communication & Society  17, no. 4 (2014): 572–593.
Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Creativity . 
New York: Penguin Press, 2004.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin, 2008.
Long, Doris. E. “Dissonant Harmonization: Limitations on ‘Cash N’ Carry’ Creativity.” Albany Law 
Review  70 (2007): 1163–1205.
O’Reilly, Tim. What is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software . 
Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly Media, 2009.
Palfrey, John, and Urs Gasser. Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives . 
New York: Basic Books, 2008.
Prensky, Marc. “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants.” In Cross Currents: Cultures, Communities, Technologies , 
edited by Kris Blair, Robin Murphy, and Jen Almjeld, 45–51. Boston, MA: Wadsworth, 2014.
Sinnreich, Aram. Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of Configurable Culture . Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010.
——. The Piracy Crusade: How the Music Industry’s War on Sharing Erodes Markets and Undermines Civil 
Liberties . Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2013.
——, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck. “Ethics Reconfigured: How Today’s Media Consumers Evaluate 
the Role of Creative Reappropriation.” Information, Communication & Society  12 (2009): 1242–1260.
Smiers, Joost, and Marieke van Schijndel. Imagine There Is No Copyright and No Cultural Conglomerate 
Too. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2009.
Sonvilla-Weiss, Stefan, ed. Mashup Cultures . New York: Springer, 2010.
Tapscott, Don and Anthony D. Williams. Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything . 
New York: Penguin, 2006.
Trammell, Aaron. “Magic Modders: Alter Art, Ambiguity, and the Ethics of Prosumption.” Journal of 
Virtual Worlds Research  6 (2013): 1–14.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights And Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens 
Creativity . New York: New York University Press, 2001.
West, Patrick Leslie, and Cher Coad. “Drawing the Line: Chinese Calligraphy, Cultural Materialisms 
and the ‘Remixing of Remix.’” M/C Journal 16 (2013).
17
THE PANOPTICON OF 
ETHICAL VIDEO REMIX 
PRACTICE
Mette Birk
Ethical practice is generally supported by our radar of common sense, as well as a frame -
work of laws and regulations, but when it comes to online practices and user-created 
content such as video remixing, the law fails to provide this framework. Creating remix 
videos of copyrighted intellectual property is not an illegal practice per se, but “in gen -
eral, no one may use another’s property without permission of the owner”1 and the act 
of taking a piece of copyrighted material and using it for remixing is a form of trespass -
ing.2 There are major gray zones in law, but it does not keep creative people from making 
and distributing remix videos. The question I will address here is, therefore, what is the 
current situation of ethical practice within video remixing communities? Some may ask 
if we are left with anarchy or normless chaos when remixers may need to operate outside 
of reasonable normative standards of law; albeit, a more reasonable question would be 
which mechanisms are used to establish and maintain subcultural norms3 when the 
framework of law does not supply proper guidelines.
In spring 2012, I distributed a survey encompassing 108 responses from video remixers 
across the globe with the purpose of clarifying these questions. Each remixer was asked 
to evaluate a number of ethical focal points. The idea of each focal point was to decipher 
ethical principles which in a general perspective would be anything “that causes the 
growth of human beings (and) would be judged good or primarily moral”4 and principles, 
which video remixers in particular would consider as “defining the fundamental terms 
of their association.”5
The results showed a heterogeneous culture in which some ethical focal points could 
largely be agreed upon while the majority of ethical focal points yielded more debate. 
However, there appeared to be a tendency for the majority of respondents to support a 
somewhat limited framework of ethical practice rather than total autonomy. On the 
other hand, the respondents were opposed to having rules and restrictions enforced 
upon them. Instead it seemed that each participant created an individualized set of 
norms, which were motivated by self-observation and discipline. To make sense of this 
research, this chapter considers the disciplining principles of panopticism, by French 
philosopher and social theorist Michel Foucault, in order to elaborate on the emergence 
of self-discipline in the absence of a defined framework of the proper. Remixers are in 
many ways empowered in what could be called a “do-ocratic panopticon,” ruled by daily 
247
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICEpractice and no need for restrictions. This will be taken into consideration with reflec -
tions upon ethical perspectives of YouTube’s Content ID tracking.
Before we dive deeper into the research it is important to emphasize that the inten -
tion behind this article is not to propose a set of “best practices for video remixing.” For 
this purpose, the survey responses, let alone the general motivations for engaging in 
remix practices, are simply too diverse. While we may never be able to say anything 
about a common ethical standard, because such a thing simply does not exist, it is pos -
sible to point toward certain tendencies from this study.
Evaluation of Ethical Focal Points
The study includes responses from five continents and practitioners of 13 different video 
remix genres, reaching 108 respondents from 18 different countries. Some respondents 
were producing countless remix videos, some were producing less; some had motivations 
of monetizing, some produced them for the sheer joy of sharing their vision and videos; 
some were engaged in online communities and some were not. The survey was distrib -
uted among video remixers, who were further asked to share the survey with their peers.
Regarding the so-called snowballing method—asking peers to share with their peers—
a paradox of studying online cultures appeared. Respondents in communities are more 
likely to share an online survey like this with other remixers over remixers who do not 
regard themselves as a part of a community. This will obviously provide a community-
biased sample and possibly not reflect the true picture of the many individual video 
remixers. Of course it would be ideal to have used a classic demographically representa -
tive sample, but the incidence rate of video remixers would be far too low, and thus the 
study would be economically unfeasible. Sinnreich also acknowledges the flaws of snow -
balling6 and like him I have chosen to use snowballing regardless—not to generalize on 
the total population of video remixers, but to explore the various facets of ideal ethics 
within video remix culture.
The central part of the survey was built upon evaluations of seven selected ethical 
focal points, which were formulated and inspired by the study of Aram Sinnreich et al. 
on media consumers’ evaluation of remix practices.7 For the purpose of evaluating com -
mon ethics among video remixers, the response to four selected focal points showed 
interesting results: (1) acknowledgement of original creators; (2) degree of creativity; 
(3) transformativeness of the original content used in a remix video; and finally (4) 
whether remixers should be able to profit from their work.
The respondents were presented with a statement in relation to each focal point and 
they were asked to respond on a four-point scale. Transformativeness and creativity both 
resemble aesthetic perspectives and here respondents answered to what degree they 
believed each focal point should be visible in a remix video on a scale from (1) “Not 
necessarily to any degree” to (4) “To a high degree.” Likewise, respondents were asked 
if remixers could/should profit as well as acknowledge their sources on a scale from 
“Absolutely NOT” to “Absolutely YES.” A delimiting answer is understood by whatever 
creates the most limits to ethical practice. So in the instance of transformativeness it 
would be most delimiting to answer that transformativeness should be visible in a remix 
video “to a high degree,” because that would imply certain demands for how the remix 
should be executed. The liberal answer would be “not necessarily to any degree” because 
this leaves the remixer with full autonomy to publish anything, including copies of 
media that may be protected by copyright laws. A delimiting answer to profiting would 
248
M. BIRKbe a respondent saying that remixers can “absolutely not” profit, and so on. Further, the 
respondents were asked how important it is to discuss the respective matters and they 
had an opportunity to comment on each question.
For the four focal points, the distribution of answers showed a tendency toward more 
delimiting evaluations ( Figure 17.1 ). We see this especially with regards to acknowledge -
ment and creativity . Hence, any presumptions about video remixers as anarchistic or 
lawless rebels have—not surprisingly—been proven wrong.
It is difficult to draw conclusions with regards to transformativeness and especially 
profiting. Some remixers were liberal in their evaluation while almost two-thirds were 
in favor of a delimiting framework regarding these two focal points. The perspectives of 
each of the four focal points are presented in the following sections.
Acknowledgement
The results on acknowledgement were very clear. Remixers generally think they should 
credit their sources. But this is not saying that they always do so, as a respondent 
explained in the comment section:
Crediting sources is a huge pain, and sometimes it’s impossible. In an ideal 
world, everyone gets credited, but most of my farmed material I have no idea 
where it comes from.
(Respondent A)
In other words, there is a discrepancy between the ideal ethical behavior and the actual 
behavior. If we take a look at actual practice, it is unlikely that 93 percent of all remix 
videos show a full credit list of all used material. This is of course a well-known problem 
within most audience and behavioral research—the difference between claimed and 100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
Acknowledgment Creativity Transformativeness ProfitingAttitudes Towards Ethical Focal Points
Delimiting Liberal7%
93%21%
79%33%
67%38%
62%Percentage of Respondents, n =108
Figure 17.1  Attitudes toward ethical focal points (graph courtesy of Mette Birk)
249
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICEactual practice. But, as stated above, the purpose of this study was not to decipher actual 
practice. It was to decipher the understanding of ideal ethics within the culture. And 
the ideal thing to do as a remixer is clearly to credit one’s sources.
None of the respondents chose the most liberal answer to the question of acknowl -
edgement. And only 7 percent chose to answer that remixers should “probably not” have 
to credit their sources. The distribution of answers between the two remaining and 
delimiting options on the four-point scale, seemed to differ when looking separately at 
community-engaged and non-community-engaged remixers. It was a clear tendency that 
the group of respondents involved in a remix community were more strictly delimiting 
than those who were not, as they displayed a higher rate of responding “Absolutely YES” 
instead of “Probably YES.” Both groups favored crediting the sources used in remix 
videos but not with the same idealistic passion.
Creativity
Ranking number two in degree of delimitation was creativity. For this focal point, the 
answers were a little more scattered than for acknowledgement, and we begin to see more 
diverse opinions within the heterogeneous group. The quotations reflect the disagreements 
of creativity; they make evident a rather delimiting demand for creativity, as supported by 
the majority of respondents, and a very liberal attitude to remix practice on the other hand.
If you’re going to use somebody else’s copyrighted work, at least have the 
decency to make it look good and be entertaining.
(Respondent B)
On a non-commercial level, if a person wishes to use copyrighted material to express 
their creativity, however limited or poorly-executed, no law should stop this. It would 
be like taking Lego from a child because they mixed them up with Mega Bloks
(Respondent C)
Creativity, in short, is a topic that can go both ways, although the majority prefers a certain 
degree of it. And again the tendency was that respondents not engaged in a community 
by comparison to those in a community were a little more liberal about requirements of 
creativity. But the majority of the respondents found that creativity should be visible to a 
certain degree, and it is a focal point that is nevertheless important to discuss.
Transformativeness
The degree of transformativeness was regarded as a less important ethical focal point, 
and the average of delimiting responses was lower than for creativity and acknowledge -
ment. However, the respondents seemed to agree more about degrees of transformative -
ness than for examples of creativity, by primarily choosing the two intermediate and 
more inexplicit answering options.
The degree of transformativeness relates to matters of plagiarism and piracy, of which 
most remixers dread being accused. Several respondents distanced themselves from 
piracy in their written comments. While a certain degree of transformation of original 
content is anticipated, what really mattered seemed to be the presence of an “original” 
concept behind the remix.
250
M. BIRKThe original work (video anyway) SHOULD be changed and to a pretty large 
degree  . . . What really matters is that the concept or idea is fairly original and 
that the artist has completed his/her goal with that concept.
(Respondent D)
Again, the respondents did not all agree. But two-thirds versus one-third indicated some 
sort of preference for remix videos to be transformative to a certain degree.
Profiting
Profit, like transformativeness, was a topic that received more diverse responses. Some 
thought it was primarily unethical to use third party content in order to profit. Others 
again did not want to be restricted by any means. Nevertheless, the number of respond -
ents in favor of nonprofiting was remarkably higher than the number of more liberal 
responses. Some even used an exceptionally delimiting discourse about it:
Making money off remixing is illegal and simply immoral. You’re using somebody 
else’s work already—at least have the decency not to make money off of it.
(Respondent B)
Few respondents claimed that they earn money producing remix videos. Only four 
respondents implied that they do so. Of course this number was affected by the distribu -
tion method8 but it is fairly clear that video remixing is, for the most part, not about 
monetary profit. It is about practicing one’s skills, living one’s fandom, making political 
statements, and possibly showing one’s creative skills to the world. And if luck strikes, 
one may be hired as an editor or offered other opportunities to make money, like this 
respondent:
I find the question about profit the hardest. In my corner of fandom, this is 
considered concretely wrong and against the law by most people. But I think it 
really depends on what kind of remix we’re talking about, and in what way the 
profit happens. For instance, receiving payment for having your work displayed 
in an art gallery  . . . feels different than, say, charging money for people to 
download a vid or something like that.
(Respondent E)
Profiting—to my surprise—was, on average, regarded the least important focal point to 
discuss in relation to remix culture. Considering the varying perspectives of profiting as 
seen in this quotation, it is understandable. We may say that nonprofit does not seem to 
be a requirement for producing remix videos. But we sense a more specific expectation 
of not charging users for watching videos.
An Average of Delimiting Attitudes to Ethical Remix Practice
Overall, the focal points above imply a tendency to a more delimiting attitude to ethical 
remix practice. But this should not be said without emphasizing the fact that within 
especially two of the four ethical focal points there were contradicting opinions of right 
and wrong. Aside from moral ideals, however, there seemed to be a general discomfort 
251
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICEabout rules of how to remix ethically. When asked for a final comment, this respondent 
made it very clear that rules were not welcomed:
I don’t think there should be rules and “have tos” concerning what you do with 
remixing, as if intellectual property concerns did not exist. If you have access 
to the files, it’s part of culture and we all own it, and have the same right to 
mash the fucking shit up however we see fit.
(Respondent A)
The point being, here—there should be no legal or ethical restrictions. But ethics on 
individual levels are still relevant. Another respondent also rejects rules while further 
emphasizing that individual remixers can have their own framework of ethical remix 
practice.
I have little interest in how remixers “should” be creating. I have personal 
opinions about attribution, profit, etc., but I think that the world of video remix 
is diverse and I know that my ethics are not universally held, nor would I neces -
sarily want them to be.
(Respondent F)
It is the combination of each individual ethical evaluation that gives us an idea of the 
structure of ethics within remix culture. With the results and quotations such as these, 
it is clear that there can be no collective fundamental terms of remixers’ association9 but 
it does not mean that all remixers support total autonomy of remix practice. From the 
results we saw a very united voice on the matter of acknowledgement, as well as certain 
expectations of creativity; that is, we see that video remixers in their distancing from 
regulations are individually empowered navigators and even manipulators of the strate -
gies of corporate measures.
Staying Close to the Existing Rules
It should be clear by now that digital technologies for content production and distribu -
tion have made it possible for anyone to be visible to everyone. Furthermore, the current 
framework of law does not properly support the remixers’ pursuits of ethically appropri -
ate behavior. This is the case because remixing is not always accepted by IP regulations. 
From the results we see that video remixers tend to support practices such as: acknowl -
edging their sources, transforming the original material to a certain degree, and using a 
minimum degree of artistic skills in order to create “original” remixes from original 
content without charging people for watching them. Now, consider this for a moment. 
And consider fair use and, for example, what is called for in European countries’ regula -
tions of fair quotation practices.
In the United States, the Limitation on Exclusive Rights deals with the amount and 
character of the portion of the original work, as well as the purpose of the work—
whether it is commercial or nonprofit10. In Danish law it is stressed that “The author of 
a work shall have the right to be identified by name as the author in accordance with 
the requirements of proper usage.”11
The generalized picture of ethical evaluations of these 108 respondents is very close 
to such legal propositions. The survey data revealed different tactics of how to operate 
252
M. BIRKclosely to the legal discourses. Vidders, for example, often distribute videos with full-
length musical scores to support the visuals, and if these scores are not public domain, 
the vidders are essentially breaking the law. All the while, vidders fervently advocate 
fair practices that pay tribute to the original creator and they support a noncommercial 
video remix culture. Other remixers may have a more liberal attitude to profiting, but 
most of them are then delimiting to the degree of transformativeness. This is the case 
with remixers producing music video remixes, as they tend to use video remixing for 
more professional purposes, having high standards of quality.
In other words, there is a need to stay as close to the framework of existing law as 
possible, which I believe can be more properly unfolded through the concept of the 
panopticon in the next section.
The Panoptic Principle and Its Contemporary Reconstruction
In general, our everyday behavior is supported by a framework of rules and expectations 
and an inherent compulsion to stay within this framework. Several social theorists have 
described this, but here I will illustrate it through the analogy of British philosopher 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon. Pan- meaning all, and -opticon  meaning to observe, the 
panopticon is a type of building, created to expose its inhabitants.12 It is a circular 
building—a prison—of several stories with a tower for observation placed in the center 
of the circle. All cells were placed in the periphery of the circle and installed with inner 
and outer windows so the inmates were fully exposed to an observer who might, or might 
not, be observing at any given moment from the tower in the center. In this sense, the 
panopticon conveyed a sentiment of an invisible omniscience13 that encouraged inhab -
itants to monitor their own behavior.
Panopticism as a societal analogy is concerned with surveillance and hierarchy. A 
minority would possess total knowledge and the masses would only know what was com -
municated to them by this minority.14 Further, the minority—with or without trained 
skills and power—could monitor the masses from the panoptic tower. Regardless, the 
prisoner would feel a sentiment of an invisible omniscience: “He is seen, but he does not 
see; he is the object of information, never a subject in communication.”15
Therefore, the panopticon should be understood as a system in which laws and rules 
are applied to society in a way that encourages self-discipline. With today’s opportunities 
to communicate from peer-to-peer (P2P) and to share and produce content, the com -
municative and inherently disciplining structure of the panopticon is falling apart. 
Michel Bauwens argues that panopticism is strongly challenged in the new media land -
scape due to the fact that knowledge is no longer assigned to a small elite.16 The exclu -
sive minority has instead transformed into a majority and the tower of the panopticon—
guarding laws and rules—is breaking down because of the P2P flow of communication 
and knowledge. To extend the analogy to the contemporary network society,17 the pris -
oner has gained sight while also becoming a subject in communication.
Considering video remix practice, the tower of the panopticon loses its raison d’être 
as it is no longer the only source of communication (remixers communicate directly 
with each other), nor does it hold a fair framework of rules for remixers to operate 
within, taking the major gray zones in the law into consideration. It does not mean, 
however, as we saw from the survey results, that the disciplining function—the senti -
ment of an invisible omniscience—has been lost. But the power relations, and thus the 
origins of norms, have definitely changed.
253
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICEIn Foucault’s opinion, the strategies of the minority in power are a way of manipulating  
the majority of people into acting in the best interest of the system.18 According to 
French philosopher and historian Michel de Certeau, manipulation is something every -
day people do to the space that is created for them.19 And researching ethics in remix 
culture, this dual perception of manipulation is important to keep in mind, as the results 
reflect a certain empowerment and autonomy among remixers, as we saw in the results. 
On one hand remixers engage in a system that is designed to manipulate their behavior 
(e.g., through law), while on the other they are the ones manipulating the framework 
around them.
So while the societal analogy, formulated by Foucault and challenged by Certeau, is 
reformed by new ways of communication, it does not mean that it loses its relevance. 
The panopticon has its rationale in the invisible omniscience and physical partition of 
cells. A video remixer is most likely to be physically parted from other remixers, although 
she remains virtually visible through her content. We can therefore use Foucault to 
understand how a certain disciplinary approach—a framework for ethical behavior—is 
upheld in video remix culture.
Self-Discipline through the Sentiment of Visibility
Michel de Certeau would have considered what we saw from the data results to be com -
mon logic—remixers seem to stick to the expected path for as long as this path does not 
intervene with their personal objective. In several comments above we also observed a 
general discomfort with rules and regulations. That is, video remixers try to follow the 
discourse of fair use regulations but they do not want to be restricted by them. As 
Foucault would argue, “Visibility is a trap”20 and operating within the visual range of 
others may create an inherent self-reflection of one’s practices and ultimately guarantee 
a minimum of behavioral order. In particular, the respondents engaged in communities 
support more delimiting ethical ideals when it comes to acknowledgement, creativity, 
profiting, and transformativeness. The more the respondents are engaged within—and 
visible to—a community, the closer to legal regulations they seek to operate.21
In other words, the panopticon of a minority projecting rules over the masses while 
leaving them with a sentiment of an invisible omniscience is breaking down in its prin -
ciple. But it may actually be less of a breakdown and more of a restructuring of power. 
The power is transferred from the tower in the center of the panopticon and spread out 
to all other “cells in the prison.” In other words, there are a large number of fans, users 
who stumble upon a video, remixers in the community, and to some degree also legal 
stakeholders, who can all assess and have expectations of a video. I believe this indicates 
that the sentiment of an invisible omniscience still exists in remix culture, but the 
omniscience is decentralized and legal stakeholders are far from the core of it. The vis -
ibility available to other remixers followed by the induced self-discipline leads to the 
rather delimiting tendency we saw in the results for ethical remix practices.
A Do-ocratic Order
The allegory of the panopticon, chosen for this study, of course has its limitations. It is 
important to emphasize that the sentiment of an invisible omniscience should not be 
understood as anxious self-control because Big Brother is watching you . Instead it is a 
subconscious action—as in when city-goers instinctively find the most decent way to 
254
M. BIRKbehave in a crowded urban space. Video remixers produce videos—if not instinctively, 
then without the need for greater analysis of consequences. Remixing can be an every -
day practice and a synergy of a community. We know from the survey that remixers often 
look to each other for inspiration and sometimes also for friendly competition:
The community thrives on building off of each other. It’s the entire premise of 
the remixing movement. It’s more of a culture than a community, in that there 
is no barrier to entry, except for creating content that builds on other content 
instead of duplicating previous work.
(Respondent G)
Certeau would call this “building off of” each other’s work a mere tactic. A tactic to 
navigate through everyday restrictions of place, time, and law.22 Meanwhile, popular 
culture has proposed a more concise term to explain this practice.
In July 2012 WIRED  magazine published an article about the hacking collective 
known as Anonymous. It was not the in-depth description of Anonymous that caught 
my attention as much as the term the undercover journalist Quinn Norton used to 
describe the structure of the collective: a do-ocracy , “that means rule by sheer doing: 
Individuals propose actions, others join in (or not)  . . . . There’s no one to grant permis -
sion, no promise of praise or credit, so every action must be its own reward.”23
Katherine Chen was the first to introduce the term in her book on the countercul -
tural festival Burning Man.24 Here, do-ocracy was used to describe a phase of the fes -
tival’s development. Before it became structured and organized Burning Man was an 
inspiring self-forming order without rules of procedure imposed by an officialdom—it 
was a do-ocracy.
Having worked through the process of deciphering ethical values in video remix cul -
ture, I have seen a clear parallel between the organizational structure of remix culture 
and do-ocracy. When I started this project, I imagined that there would be specific 
norms of remixing within remix culture. Instead I discovered the tendency that video 
remixers are delimiting in regard to certain perspectives (acknowledgement and trans -
formativeness) although I found no collective fundamental terms. But the panopticon 
still guards the principles that “cause growth” within remix culture—in the essence of 
Lévy’s delineation of ethics.25 In other words: Video remix culture has a do-ocratic struc -
ture, which is kept in some sort of order through the sentiment of visibility to other 
remixers. The remixers are mainly liberated from organized structures and empowered 
to find their own individual path of ethical practice.
Do-ocracy was the admirable strength of Burning Man and it is the current force of 
Anonymous. Likewise, video remix culture is a market place of doings and it thrives off 
of the chaotic and unstructured actions of individuals. Burning Man lost value as it was 
structured through the strategies of organized power relations, and one might fear that 
video remix culture will lose its strength if larger media organizations were to get 
involved—even if it is merely to greet the video remix culture.
Greeting Video Remix
Historically it is rare that video remixers have been sentenced or heavily fined for viola -
tions of copyright, although inconsequential takedowns of videos are quite common. 
Several respondents object to cases of rather hostile treatment from media corporations:
255
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICEI have the same frustration as others who are forced to hide their work because 
they are being pursued by corporate entities with no understanding whatsoever 
of fanmixing, only of piracy (which in many cases isn’t even involved).
(Respondent H)
Now, with the majority of remixers supporting ethical ideals close to those proposed by 
law, one might ask why some media conglomerates are still trying to make video remix -
ers’ lives harder. It has already become clear to some parts of the modern media industry 
that the fight against remixers is not a fight that can be won. YouTube has taken the 
consequence of this and implemented a system, which enables the IP rights holders to 
either block, track, or make money in cases of undeclared usage of third party material. 
They do so through the Content ID system.26 Content providers send audio or video files 
to YouTube and every uploaded video is then compared to a database of reference files. 
In cases where a match is made, the content owner can choose between making the 
video nonviewable; keeping the video viewable and tracking statistics of views and 
usage of content; or making money from ads that will appear in conjunction with the 
video.
More than 200 million videos have been claimed by Content ID so far.27 The system 
has the advantage of letting its users interact with, and maybe even remix, the content 
while not demolishing the lucrative incentive for content producers to produce new 
content. On the other hand, remix videos may still be unreasonably blocked even 
though they meet all fair use requirements.
Not making restrictions for video remixers but rather possibilities for content owners 
could be a step in the right direction. But the downside of the Content ID system may 
be that it reenables an elite to monitor the actions within the panopticon through the 
use of huge servers and masses of data. To use the terminology of Certeau,28 it is a way 
for media corporations to implement and exercise strategies to control the tactics of the 
users. And in reference to Foucault’s perception, Content ID can be thought of as an 
invisible omniscience, it allows an elite to possess knowledge to which the rest of the 
panopticon has no access.29 In the end this could be the emergence of a new panoptic 
tower.
Conclusion
Everyday practice within the remixing panopticon is—for video remixers—an activity 
with no defined fundamental terms of their association. There are, however, a few fun -
damental terms, which primarily can be agreed to be of good practice. For example it is 
good practice always to credit the owners of the original content and to treat creatively 
the materials in use. A less distinct majority supports a certain degree of transformation 
of original content as well as a noncommercial remix culture. In this sense the video 
remixers often support a degree of delimitation, which also seems to make them operate 
as close to law as legal obstacles will allow.
The panopticon with the missing tower is an analogy of the tendencies of normative 
behavior in remix culture—a behavior that emerges through the structure of what we 
may call a do-ocracy. Norms simply come into existence through the everyday and indi -
vidual actions of participants of the community and not through rules enforced by a 
selected minority. Video remixers are panoptic inhabitants who have gained sight and 
have become subjects in communication. That is, remixers do not sit up and listen to a 
256
M. BIRKminority of lawmen and displeased content owners; instead they can be held account -
able to the entire Internet population. Mostly this encourages self-discipline of ethical 
behavior such as the aforementioned acknowledgement of sources. But it does not call 
for further regulations. On the contrary regulations are not well received.
With the described self-discipline, IP rights holders should worry less about adverse 
abuse and more about supporting a regulation-free space for remixers to operate within. 
But first and foremost we should advocate a remixing panopticon free of the panoptic 
tower. A culture where people “build off of” each other with no other restrictions other 
than their own self-consciousness.
Notes
 1 Robert Cooter and Thomas Ulen. Law and Economics , 6th ed. (Boston, MA: Prentice Hall, 2012), 158.
 2 Ibid.
 3 The theoretical difference of norms, ethics, and morals are important to some. But here they shall be used 
relatively interchangeably. This is because of the fact that respondents of the survey also did so.
 4 Pierre L évy. Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace  (New York: Plenum Trade, 
1997), 28.
 5 John Rawls. A Theory of Justice  (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1999), 10.
 6 Aram Sinnreich. Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of Configurable Culture  (Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010).
 7 Aram Sinnreich, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck. “Ethics reconfigured,” Information, Communication 
& Society  12, no. 8 (2009).
 8 Snowballing gained more resonance in established communities, such as vidding and other fandom com -
munities, which rarely accommodate professionals who would make money from distributing remix vid -
eos.
 9 Rawls,  A Theory of Justice .
10 “U.S. Code—Title 17 § 107—Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Fair Use,” in 17, ed. Legal Information 
Institute (1992), http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/107?qt-us_code_tabs=1#qt-us_code_tabs.
11 “Consolidated Act on Copyright,” in Consolidated Act No. 202 , ed. Kulturministeriet, http://www.kum.
dk/Documents/English%20website/Copyright/Consolidated%20Act%20on%20Copyright%20
2010%5B1%5D.pdf.
12 John McAuley, Joanne Duberley, and Phil Johnson. Organization Theory: Challenges and Perspectives  
(Harlow, UK: Prentice Hall/Financial Times, 2007); Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of 
the Prison  (New York: Penguin Books, 1991 [1975]).
13 Foucault, Discipline and Punish .
14 Michel Bauwens. “The Poltical Economy of Peer Production,” 1000 Days of Theory , 2005, http://www.
ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499.
15 Foucault, Discipline and Punish , 200.
16 Bauwens, “The Political Economy of Peer Production.”
17 Manuel Castells. The Rise of the Network Society , 2nd ed., The Information Age: Economy, Society, and 
Culture, vol. 1 (Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010 [1997]).
18 Willem Frijhoff. “Foucault Reformed by Certeau: Historical Strategies of Discipline and Everyday Tactics 
of Appropriation,” in Cultural History after Foucault , ed. John Neubauer (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 
1999).
19 Michel de Certeau. The Practice of Everyday Life  (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1984).
20 Foucault, Discipline and Punish , 200.
21 Mette Birk. “Remixers in the Panopticon—An empirical study of ethics and communities within video 
remix culture” (master’s thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2012).
22 Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life .
23 Quinn Norton. “How Anonymous Picks Targets, Launches Attacks, and Takes Powerful Organizations 
Down,” WIRED  July 2012.
24 Katherine K. Chen. Enabling Creative Chaos: The Organization Behind the Burning Man Event  (Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009).
25 Lévy, Collective Intelligence , definition in Chapter 1 .
257
THE PANOPTICON OF ETHICAL REMIX PRACTICE26 YouTube.com, “Content ID,” http://www.youtube.com/t/contentid.
27 YouTube.com, “Statistics,” http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.
28 Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life .
29 Foucault, Discipline and Punish .
Bibliography
Bauwens, Michel. “The Poltical Economy of Peer Production.” In 1000 Days of Theory , January 12, 
2005, http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499 (accessed May 1, 2014).
Birk, Mette. “Remixers in the Panopticon: An Empirical Study of Ethics and Communities within 
Video Remix Culture.” Master’s thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2012.
Castells, Manuel. The Rise of the Network Society . The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture, 
vol. 1, 2nd ed . Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010 [1997].
Certeau, Michel de. The Practice of Everyday Life . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1984.
Chen, Katherine K. Enabling Creative Chaos: The Organization Behind the Burning Man Event . Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009.
“Consolidated Act on Copyright.” In Consolidated Act No. 202 , edited by Kulturministeriet, 35, 2010, 
http://www.kum.dk/Documents/English%20website/Copyright/Consolidated%20Act%20on%20
Copyright%202010%5B1%5D.pdf (accessed May 1, 2014).
Cooter, Robert, and Thomas Ulen. Law and Economics . 6th ed. Boston, MA: Prentice Hall, 2012.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison . New York: Penguin Books, 1991 [1975].
Frijhoff, Willem. “Foucault Reformed by Certeau: Historical Strategies of Discipline and Everyday 
Tactics of Appropriation.” In Cultural History after Foucault , edited by John Neubauer. New York: 
Aldine de Gruyter, 1999.
Lévy, Pierre. Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace . New York: Plenum Trade, 
1997.
McAuley, John, Joanne Duberley, and Phil Johnson. Organization Theory: Challenges and Perspectives . 
Harlow, UK: Prentice Hall/Financial Times, 2007.
Norton, Quinn. “How Anonymous Picks Targets, Launches Attacks, and Takes Powerful Organizations 
Down.” WIRED  July 2012.
Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1999.
Sandvik, Kjetil. “Magt, Oplevelseøkonomi Og Web 2.0-En Forandringsfortælling.” Ordet #47/Magt  no. 
47 (2007).
Sinnreich, Aram. Mashed Up: Music, Technology, and the Rise of Configurable Culture . Amherst, MA: 
University of Massachusetts Press, 2010.
Sinnreich, Aram, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck. “Ethics Reconfigured.” Information, 
Communication & Society 12, no. 8 (2009): 1242–1260.
“U.S. Code—Title 17 § 107—Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Fair Use.” In 17, edited by Legal 
Information Institute, 1992. http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/17/107?qt-us_code_
tabs=1#qt-us_code_tabs (accessed August 6, 2014).
YouTube.com. “Content ID.” http://www.youtube.com/t/contentid (accessed August 6, 2014) .
———. “Statistics.” http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html (accessed May 1, 2014).
18
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP 
TOGETHER/APART
Rethinking the Political Economy of 
Scholarly Book Publishing
Janneke Adema
So as we flow across the page in the here and now, and as you process the words as you read 
them, remember this: they process you as well.1
The act of cutting media and the concept of “the cut” form an essential aspect of remix 
theory and remix practice. Remix can be seen as being “supported by the practice of cut/
copy and paste.”2 Yet, on a larger scale, cutting can also be understood as an essential 
aspect of the way reality is structured and defined. The first part  of this chapter will 
provide an analysis of the way the cut and the practice of cutting have been theorized 
in remix studies, mostly from within a representationalist  framework. This analysis will 
then be juxtaposed and entangled with a diffractive3 reading of a selection of critical 
theory, feminist new materialist, and media studies texts. These specifically focus on the 
act of cutting from a performative  perspective, from which I will explore what a posthu -
manist vision of remix and the cut might look like.
In the second part , I will examine how the potential of the cut and related to that, 
how the politics inherent in the act of cutting, can affirmatively be applied to scholarly 
book publishing.4 How can we account for our own ethical entanglements as scholars in 
the becoming of the book? After analyzing how the book functions as an apparatus, a 
material-discursive formation or assemblage which enacts cuts, I will explore two pub -
lishing projects— Living Books about Life  and remixthebook —that have tried to rethink 
and reperform the apparatus. Both projects specifically take responsibility for the cuts 
they make in an effort to “cut well.”5 How have these projects established an alternative 
politics and ethics of the cut that is open to change, and what are their potential 
shortcomings?
This chapter thus explores how remix and the cut can be used as part of a posthuman -
ist performative framework to question issues of quality, fixity, and authorship/authority—  
essentialist and inherently humanist notions on which a great deal of the print-based 
academic institution continues to be based. As I will argue, remix, as a form of 
259
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APART“differential cutting,” can be a means to intervene in and rethink humanities knowledge 
production—with respect to the political economy of book publishing and the com -
modification of scholarship into knowledge objects—opening up and enabling a poten -
tial alternative politics of the book. Based on Foucault’s concept of “the apparatus,” as 
well as on Barad’s posthumanist expansion of this concept,6 it will be argued that the 
scholarly book functions as an apparatus that cuts the processes of scholarly creation and 
becoming into authors, scholarly objects, and a separate observed world. Drawing atten -
tion to the processual and unstable nature of the book instead, this contribution will 
focus on the book’s critical and political potential to question these cuts and to disturb 
existing scholarly practices and institutions.
By engaging in a diffractive reading, this chapter should be read as a “performative 
text.” It is not only a piece of writing on the topic of remix and on “cutting things 
together and apart,” but through its methodology it also remixes a variety of theories 
from seemingly disparate fields, locations, times, and contexts.7
The Material-discursive Cut within a Performative Framework
Remix theorist Eduardo Navas has written extensively about cut/copy/paste as a practice 
and concept within (remixed) music and art. For Navas, remix is deeply embedded in a 
cultural and linguistic framework, where it is a form of discourse at play across culture.8 
This focus on remix as a cultural variable  or as a form of cultural representation  seems to 
be the dominant mode of analysis within remix studies as a field.9 Based on his discursive 
framework of remix as representation and repetition (following Jacques Attali) Navas, 
for instance, makes a distinction between copying and cutting. He sees cutting (into 
something physical) as materially altering the world, whereas copying (a specific form 
of cutting), keeps the integrity of the original intact. Navas explores how the concept 
of sampling was altered under the influence of changes in mechanical reproduction, 
where sampling as a term started to take on the meaning of copying as the act of taking 
not from the world, but from an archive of representations of the world. Sampling thus 
came to be understood culturally as a meta-activity.10 In this sense Navas distinguishes 
between material sampling from the world (which is disturbing) and sampling from 
representations (which is a form of metarepresentation that keeps the original intact). 
The latter is a form of cultural citation—where one cites in terms of discourse—and this 
citation is strictly conceptual.11
To go beyond such a distinction between a materialist and a representationalist vision 
of remix, the insights of new materialist theorists will be beneficial. They will aid in 
exploring what a “material-discursive” and performative vision of cutting and the cut 
will be able to contribute to the idea of remix as a critical affirmative doing . Here remix 
is extended beyond a cultural  logic operating at the level of representations , seeing it as 
always already a material  practice disturbing and intervening in the world. Karen Barad 
for instance moves beyond the binary distinction between reality and representation by 
replacing representationalism with a theory of posthumanist performativity, when she 
states: “the move toward performative alternatives to representationalism shifts the 
focus from questions of correspondence between descriptions and reality (e.g., do they 
mirror nature or culture?) to matters of practices/doings/actions.”12 Here remixes as rep -
resentations are not just mirrors or allegories of the world but direct interventions in the 
world. In this respect, both copying and cutting are performative, in the sense that they 
change the world, they alter and disturb it. Following this reasoning, copying is not 
260
J. ADEMAontologically distinct from cutting, as there is no distinction between discourse and the 
real world: language and matter are entangled (they are ongoing material (re)configur -
ings of the world), where matter is already discursive and vice versa.13
Barad’s form of realism is not about representing an independent reality outside of 
us, but about performatively intervening, intra-acting with and as part of the world.14 
For her intentions are attributable to complex networks of agencies, both human and 
nonhuman, functioning within a certain context of material conditions.15 Where in 
reality agencies and “differences” are entangled phenomena, what Barad calls “agen -
tial cuts” cleave things together and apart, creating subjects and objects by enacting 
determinate boundaries, properties, and meanings. The separations that people make 
signify that they create inclusions and exclusions through their specific focus. We 
need to take responsibility for these cuts, Barad argues, as we are accountable for the 
entanglements of self and other that we weave, as well as for the cuts and separations, 
and the exclusions that we create.16 Although not enacted directly by us, but by the 
larger material arrangement of which we are a part (cuts are made from the inside), 
we are still accountable to the cuts that we help enact: there are new possibilities and 
ethical obligations to act (cut) at every moment.17 In this sense “cuts do violence but 
also open up and rework the agential conditions of possibility.”18 It matters which cuts 
are enacted, where different cuts enact different materialized becomings. As Barad 
states: “It’s all a matter of where we place the cut.  . . . what is at stake is accountability 
to marks on bodies in their specificity by attending to how different cuts produce  
differences that matter.”19
Cutting Well
Media theorists Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska explore the notion of the cut as an 
inevitable conceptual and material interruption in the process of mediation, focusing 
specifically on where  to cut in as far as it relates to how to cut well . They argue that the 
cut is both a technique and an ethical imperative, where cutting is a necessary act to 
create meaning, to be able to say something about things.20 On a more ontological level 
they argue that “cutting is fundamental to our emergence in the world, as well as our 
differentiation from it.”21 Here they see a similarity with Derrida’s notion of différance , a 
term that functions as a cut, where it stabilizes the flow of mediation into things, objects, 
and subjects.22 Through the act of cutting we shape our temporally stabilized selves (we 
become individuated) as well as actively forming the world we are part of and the matter 
surrounding us.23 Kember and Zylinska are specifically interested in the ethics of the cut. 
If we have to inevitably cut in the process of becoming (to shape it and give it meaning) 
how is it that we can cut well? How can we engage with a process of, as they call it, “dif -
ferential cutting,” enabling space for the vitality of becoming?24 To enable a “productive 
engagement with the cut,” Kember and Zylinska are interested in performative and 
affirmative acts of cutting. They use the example of photography to explore the necessity 
to make cuts while still enabling the duration of things.25 Cutting becomes a technique 
not of rendering or representing the world, but of managing, ordering, and creating it, 
of giving it meaning. The act of cutting is crucial, Kember and Zylinska argue, to our 
“becoming-with and becoming-different from the world,” by shaping the universe and 
shaping ourselves in it.26 Through cutting, they state, we enact both separation and 
relationality where an “incision” becomes an ethical imperative, a “decision,” one which 
is not made by a humanist, liberal subject but by agentic processes. For Kember and 
261
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APARTZylinska a vitalist and affirmative way of cutting well thus leaves space for duration, it 
does not close down life’s creative impulse.27
The Affirmative Cut in Remix
To further investigate the imperative to cut well, I want to return to remix theory and 
practice, where the potential of the cut and of remix as a subversive and affirmative 
logic, and of appropriation as a political tool and a form of critical production, has 
been extensively explored. Here I want to examine what a performative vision on and 
of remix might look like. In what sense do remix theory and practice function, in the 
words of Barad, as “specific agential practices/intra-actions/performances through 
which specific exclusionary boundaries are enacted?”28 Navas, for instance, conceptu -
alizes remix as a vitalism: a formless force, capable of taking on any form and medium. 
In this vitalism lies the power of remix to create something new out of something 
already existing, by reconfiguring it. In this sense as Navas states, “to remix is to com -
pose.” But remix, through these reconfiguring and juxtaposing gestures, also has the 
potential to question and critique, becoming an act that interrogates “authorship, 
creativity, originality, and the economics that supported the discourse behind these 
terms as stable cultural forms.”29 However, Navas warns for the potential of remix to 
be both what he calls “regressive and reflexive,” where the openness of its politics 
entails that it can also be easily co-opted, where “sampling and principles of 
Remix  . . . have been turned into the preferred tools for consumer culture.”30 A regres -
sive remix then is a form of regression: a recombination of something that is already 
familiar and has proven to be successful for the commercial market. A reflexive remix 
on the other hand is regenerative, as it allows for constant change.31 Here we can find 
the potential seeds of resistance in remix, where, as a type of intervention, Navas 
states it has the potential to question conventions, “to rupture the norm in order to 
open spaces of expression for marginalized communities,” and, if implemented well, it 
can become a tool of autonomy.32
One of the realms of remix practice in which an affirmative position of critique and 
politics has been explored in depth, while taking clear responsibility for the material-
discursive entanglements it enacts, is in feminist remix culture, most specifically in 
vidding and political remix video. Francesca Coppa defines vidding as “a grassroots art 
form in which fans re-edit television or film into music videos called ‘vids’ or ‘fan -
vids.’”33 By cutting and selecting certain bits and juxtaposing them with others, the 
practice of vidding, beyond or as part of a celebratory fan work, has the potential to 
become a critical textual engagement as well as a recutting and recomposing (cutting-
together) of the world differently. As Kristina Busse and Alexis Lothian state, vidding 
practically deconstructs “the ideological frameworks of film and TV by unmaking 
those frameworks technologically.”34 Coppa sees vidding as an act of both bringing 
together and taking apart, to receive the desired image. Here Coppa argues we need 
to pay attention to what gets cut out too.35 The act of cutting is empowering and gives 
agency to vidders in Coppa’s vision, where “she who cuts,” is better than “she who is 
cut into pieces.”36
Video artist Elisa Kreisinger, who makes queer 
video remixes of TV series such as Sex and the City  
and Mad Men , states that political remix videos 
harbor more of an element of critique, to correct Elisa Kreisinger writes about 
her remixes in Chapter 37  
Remixing the Remix.
262
J. ADEMAcertain elements (such as gender norms) in media works, without necessarily having to 
be fan works. As Kreisinger states, “I see remixing as the rebuilding and reclaiming of 
once-oppressive images into a positive vision of just society.”37 As Renee Slajda argues 
with respect to Kreisinger’s remix videos, critique is not about deconstructing images 
“without constructing something new in its place.” Slajda sees this as a feminist move 
beyond criticism, where she is interested in how remix artists turn critical consciousness 
into a creative practice to “reshape the media—and the world—as they would like to 
see it.”38 For Kreisinger too, political remix video is not only about deconstructing and 
creating “more diverse and affirming narratives of representation.”39 It has the potential 
to effect actual change (although, as Navas, she is aware that remix is also co-opted by 
corporations to reinforce stereotypes). Remix challenges dominant notions of ownership 
and copyright as well as the author/reader and owner/user binaries supporting these 
notions. By challenging these, remix videos also challenge the production and political 
economy of media.40 As video artist Martin Leduc argues, “we may find that remix  
can offer a means not only of responding to the commercial media industry, but of 
replacing it.”41
The Agentic Cut in Remix
Next to providing important affirmative contributions to the imperative to cut well, 
and to reconfigure boundaries, remix has also been implemental in rethinking and 
reperforming agency and authorship in art and academia, critiquing the liberal human -
ist subject that is the author, while exploring more posthumanist, entangled forms of 
agency in the form of agentic processes, in which agency is more distributed. Paul 
Miller, aka DJ Spooky, writes about flows and cuts in his artist’s book Rhythm Science . 
For Miller, sampling is a doing, a creating with found objects, but this also means that 
we need to take responsibility for its genealogy, for he or she “who speaks through 
you.”42 Miller’s practical and critical engagement with remix and the cut is especially 
interesting when it comes to his conceptualizing of identity, where—as in the new 
materialist thinking of Barad—he does not presuppose an identity or a self, but states 
that our identity comes about through  our cuts, where the act of cutting shapes and 
creates our selves. “The collage becomes my identity,” he states.43 For Miller, agency 
is thus not related to our identity as creators or artists, but to the flow or becoming, 
which always comes first. We are so immersed in and defined by the data that sur -
rounds us on a daily basis, that, Miller argues, “we are entering an era of multiplex 
consciousness.”44
Miller writes about creating different personae as shareware, while Mark Amerika is 
interested in the concept of performing theory and critiquing individuality and the self 
through concepts such as “flux personae,” establishing the self as an “artist-medium” and 
a “post-production medium.”45 Amerika sees performing theory as a creative process in 
which pluralities of conceptual personae are created that explore their becoming. 
Through these various personae, Amerika critiques the unity of the self.46 In this vision 
the artist becomes a medium through which language, in the form of prior inhabited 
data, flows. When the artist writes his words they don’t feel like his own words but like 
an assemblage of sampled material from his cocreators and collaborators. By becoming 
an artist-medium, Amerika argues, “the self per se disappears in a sea of source mate -
rial.”47 By exploring this idea of the networked author concept or of the writer as an 
artist-medium, Amerika contemplates what could be a new (posthuman) author 
263
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APARTfunction for the digital age, with the artist as a postproduction medium “becoming 
instrument” and “becoming electronics.”48
Recutting the Scholarly Apparatus
What can we take away from this transversal reading of feminist new materialism, criti -
cal and media theory, and remix studies, with respect to cutting as an affirmative mate -
rial-discursive practice? Through this reading I will analyze alternatives to the political 
economy of book publishing with its focus on ownership and copyright and the book as 
a consumer object. How can remix and the cut performatively critique established 
(humanist) notions such as authorship, authority, quality, and fixity underlying scholarly 
book publishing? This (re)reading might pose potential problems for our idea of critique 
and ethics when notions of stability, objectivity, and distance tend to disappear. So, how 
can we make ethical, critical cuts in our scholarship while simultaneously promoting a 
politics of the book that is open and responsible to change, difference, and exclusions?
To explore this, we need to analyze the way the book functions as an apparatus. The 
concept of dispositif  or “apparatus,” originates from Foucault’s later work.49 As a concept, 
it went beyond “discursive formation” connecting discourse more closely with material 
practices.50 The apparatus is the system of relations that can be established between 
these disparate elements. However, an apparatus for Foucault is not a stable and solid 
thing but a shifting set of relations inscribed in a play of power that is strategic and 
responds to an urgent need, a need to control.51 Deleuze’s fluid outlook sees it as an 
assemblage capable of escaping attempts of subversion and control. He is interested in 
the new, the variable creativity which arises out of dispositifs  (in their actuality), or in 
the ability of the apparatus to transform itself, where we as human beings belong to 
dispositifs  and act within them .52 Barad connects the notion of the cut to her posthuman 
Bohrian concept of the apparatus. As part of our intra-actions, apparatuses, in the form 
of certain material arrangements or practices, effect an agential cut between subject and 
object, which are not separate but come into being through intra-actions.53 Apparatuses 
for Barad are open-ended and dynamic material-discursive practices, articulating  
concepts and things.54
In what way has the apparatus of the book—consisting of an entanglement of rela -
tionships between amongst others authors, books, the outside world, readers, the mate -
rial production and political economy of book publishing and the discursive formation 
of scholarship—executed its power relations through cutting in a certain way? As I will 
argue, it has mostly operated via a logic of the cut that favors neat separations between 
books and authors (as human creators) and readers; that cuts out fixed scholarly book 
objects of an established quality and originality; and that pastes this system together via 
a system of strict ownership and copyright rules. How and where the apparatus of the 
book cuts at the present moment does not take into full consideration the inherent fluid 
nature of the book and authorship,55 nor the increased possibilities for collaboration, 
updates, versionings, and multimedia enhancements in the digital environment. It 
enforces a political economy that keeps books and scholarship closed off from the major -
ity of the world’s potential readers, functioning in an increasingly commercial environ -
ment (fueled by public money), which makes it very difficult to publish specialized 
scholarship lacking commercial promise. It also does not take into consideration how 
the humanist discourse on authorship, quality, and originality that continues to underlie 
the humanities, perpetuates this publishing system in a material sense, nor how likewise 
264
J. ADEMAthe specific print-based materiality of the book and the publishing institutions that have 
grown around it have been incremental in shaping the discursive formation of the 
humanities and scholarship as a whole.
Following this essay’s diffractively collected insights on remix and the cut, I want to 
underscore the need to see and understand the book as a process of becoming, as an 
entanglement of plural (human and nonhuman) agencies. The separations or cuts that 
have been forced out of these entanglements by specific material-discursive practices 
have created inclusions and exclusions, book objects and author subjects, controlling 
subject and object positions.56 Books as apparatuses are thus performative, they are real -
ity shaping. As I will argue, not enough responsibility is taken for the cuts that are 
enacted with and through the book as an apparatus. There is a lack of acknowledgement 
of our own roles as scholars in shaping the way we publish research. Next to that our 
approved, dominant scholarly practices—which include the (printed) book—are simul -
taneously affecting us as scholars and the way we act in and describe the world and/or 
our object of study. It is important to acknowledge our entangled nature in all this, 
where scholars need to take more responsibility for the practices they enact and enforce, 
and the cuts that they make—especially in their own book-publishing practices.
Open-Ended Scholarly Recutting
Living Books about Life  and remixthebook  are two book-publishing projects that have 
explored the potential of the cut and remix for an affirmative politics of publishing. In 
what sense have they, through their specific cuts, promoted an open-ended politics of 
the book, which enables duration and difference?
Mark Amerika, author/curator of the remixthebook  project, states it is not a traditional 
form of (book) scholarship, but a hybrid performance platform.57 Remixthebook  is a col -
lection of multimedia writings that explore remix as a cultural phenomenon by them -
selves referencing and mashing up curated selections of earlier theory, avant-garde and 
art writings on remix. It consists of a printed book and an accompanying website that 
functions as a platform for a collaboration between artists and theorists exploring prac -
tice-based research.58 Amerika tries to evade the bound nature of the printed book, and 
its fixity and authority, by bringing together this community of people to remix, perform, 
and discuss the theories and texts presented in the book via video, audio, and text-based 
remixes published on the website—opening the book and its source material up for 
continuous multimedia recutting. Amerika also challenges dominant ideas of authorship 
by playing with personae and by drawing on a variety of remixed source material in his 
book, as well as by directly involving his remix community as collaborators on the 
project.
However a discrepancy remains visible between Amerika’s aim to create a commons 
of renewable source material along with a platform for everyone to use, and the specific 
choices/cuts he has made with respect to the outlets he chose to fulfill this aim. 
Remixthebook  is still published as a traditional printed book which hasn’t been made 
available on an open-access basis to more fully enable remix and reuse. The website is 
also not openly available for everyone to contribute to as the contributors have been 
selected or curated by Amerika and cocurator Rick Silva. The remixes on the website 
are also not available for remixing, as they are licensed under an all-rights-reserved copy -
right. Furthermore, Amerika is still acting as the “traditional” humanist author of both 
his book, and of the (curated) collection of material on the website, by using his name 
265
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APARTon the cover of the book and as part of the copyright license, which in the scholarly and 
artistic realm still function as signs of attribution and crediting. It is this issue of human -
ist authorship that the Living Books about Life  project actively tried to challenge.
Living Books about Life  is a series of open-access books about life published by Open 
Humanities Press, providing a bridge between the humanities and the sciences. All the 
books repackage existing open-access science-related research, supplementing this with 
an original editorial essay to unify the collection. They also provide additional multime -
dia material, from videos to podcasts to whole books. The books have been published 
online in an open source wiki platform, meaning the books are “open on a read/write 
basis for users to help compose, edit, annotate, translate and remix.”59 As Gary Hall, one 
of the initiators of the project has argued, this project challenges the physical and con -
ceptual limitations of the traditional codex by including multimedia and whole books, 
but also by emphasizing its duration by publishing in a wiki. Thus it “rethinks  
‘the book’ itself as a living, collaborative endeavor.”60 Hall argues that wikis offer a 
potential to question and critically engage issues of authorship, work and stability. They 
can offer increased accessibility and induce participation from contributors from the 
periphery. As he states, “wiki-communication can enable us to produce a multiplicitous 
academic and publishing network, one with a far more complex, fluid, antagonistic, 
distributed, and decentered structure, with a variety of singular and plural, human and 
non-human actants and agents.”61 One of the drawbacks of wikis, however, is that they 
are envisaged and structured in such a way that authorship and clear attribution/respon -
sibility, as well as version control, remain an essential part of their functioning. The 
structure behind a wiki is still based on an identifiable author and a version history, 
giving access to changes and modifications. In reality, the authority of the author is not 
challenged. Furthermore, the books in the series also include a “frozen version” and are 
published not as common wikis, but as books with covers and clearly defined authors 
and editors. Mirroring the physical materiality of the book in such a way also reproduces 
the aura of the book, including the discourse of scholarship this brings with it. This 
might explain why the user interaction with the books in the series has been limited in 
comparison to other wikis. Here the choice to recut the collected information as a book, 
as part of rethinking and reperforming the book as concept and form, might paradoxi -
cally have been both the success and the failure of the project.
Conclusion
This text too, in all its conceptual performativity, falls prey to many of the above criti -
cisms: it is published in a closed-access paperbound book by a reputable press with a 
clearly distinguishable set of editors and authors. Nevertheless, just as the projects men -
tioned above, it has attempted to rethink (through its diffractive methodology) how we 
might start to cut differently where it comes to our research and publication practices. 
Cutting and stabilizing still needs to be accomplished. The politics of the book itself can 
be helpful in this respect, where, as Gary Hall and I have argued elsewhere, “if it is to 
continue to be able to serve ‘new ends’ as a medium through which politics itself can be 
rethought  . . . then the material and cultural constitution of the book needs to be con -
tinually reviewed, re-evaluated and reconceived.”62 The book itself can thus be a 
medium with the critical and political potential to question specific cuts and to disturb 
existing scholarly practices and institutions. Books are always a process of becoming 
(albeit one that is continuously interrupted and disturbed). Books are entanglements of 
266
J. ADEMAdifferent agencies that cannot be discerned beforehand. In the cuts that we make to 
untangle them we create specific material book objects, but in these specific cuts, the 
book has always already redeveloped; it has been remixed. It has mutated and moved on. 
The book is thus a processual, contextualized entity, which we can use as a means to 
critique our established practices and institutions, both through its forms (and the cuts 
we make to create these forms) and its metaphors, and through the practices that accom -
pany it.
Notes
 1 Paul D. Miller, Rhythm Science  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 9.
 2 Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  (New York: Springer, 2012), 65.
 3 Donna Haraway first introduced the practice and concept of reading diffractively. Her approach was 
extended by Karen Barad, who argues that as a methodology, diffraction “provides a way of attending to 
entanglements in reading important insights and approaches through one another.” Iris van der Tuin 
defines it as a reading that “breaks through the academic habit of criticism and works along affirmative 
lines.” In this sense it is not based on a comparison between philosophies as closed, isolated entities, but 
on “affirming links between  . . . schools of thoughts.” Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: 
Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007), 
30. Iris van der Tuin, “‘A Different Starting Point, a Different Metaphysics’: Reading Bergson and Barad 
Diffractively,” Hypatia  26, no. 1 (February 2011), 22, 27.
 4 With affirmative politics I want to focus on the potential of power as a form of empowerment (potentia), 
where negative, reactionary politics can be operationalized into affirmative alternative practices. As Rosi 
Braidotti has argued, this does not mean a distancing from critical theory. Rosi Braidotti, “On Putting the 
Active Back into Activism,” New Formations  68, no. 1 (2010), 42–57.
 5 Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska, Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process  (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2012).
 6 In which apparatuses are conceptualized as specific material configurations that effect an agential cut 
between, and hence produce, subject and object. Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway , 148.
 7 This is akin to what net artist Mark Amerika calls “performing theory.” As a “remixologist,” Amerika sees 
data as a renewable energy source, where ideas, theories, and samples become his source material. By 
creating and performing remixes of this source material, which is again based on a mashup of other source 
material, a collaborative interweaving of different texts, thinkers, and artists emerges, one that celebrates 
and highlights the communal aspect of creativity in art and academia. Mark Amerika, remixthebook  
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
 8 Navas, Remix Theory , 3.
 9 Lawrence Lessig and Henry Jenkins, for instance, talk about, respectively, remix as a read/write culture 
and as part of convergence cultures, although both see remix as embedded in technology and encapsu -
lated by powers of material-economic production. Elisabeth Nesheim on the other hand—although still 
starting from a position of human agency—goes beyond remix as a cultural concept and explores princi -
ples of remix in nature, analyzing bioengineering as a form of genetic remixing and investigating bioartists 
who remix nature/culture as a form of critique and reflection. Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and 
Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York: Penguin Press, 2008); Henry Jenkins, Convergence 
Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide  (New York: New York University Press, 2008); Elisabeth 
Nesheim, “Remixed Culture/Nature: Is Our Current Remix Culture Giving Way to a Remixed Nature?” 
presented at UIB: DIKULT 303 Remix Culture, November 2009.
10 Navas, Remix Theory , 12.
11 Ibid., 11–16.
12 Karen Barad, “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter,” 
Signs  28, no. 3 (1 March 2003): 802.
13 I am talking here about the fact that there is no onto-epistemological distinction between cutting and 
copying. From an ethical perspective, however, one might argue, as Navas has done extensively, that 
making a distinction between referencing ideas in conceptual and material form, might help us in our aid 
toward copyright reform. Eduardo Navas, “Notes on Everything Is a Remix, Part 1 , 2, and 3,” Remix 
Theory , September 3, 2011, http://remixtheory.net/?p=480.
267
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APART14 Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway , 37.
15 Ibid., 23.
16 Ibid., 393.
17 Ibid., 178–179.
18 Rick Dolphijn and Iris van der Tuin, New Materialism: Interviews & Cartographies  (Ann Arbor, MI: Open 
Humanities Press, 2012), 52, http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.11515701.0001.001.
19 Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway , 348.
20 Kember and Zylinska, Life After New Media , 27.
21 Ibid., 168.
22 Ibid., xvi.
23 Ibid., 168.
24 Ibid., 81.
25 Ibid., 81.
26 Ibid., 75.
27 Ibid., 82.
28 Karen Barad, “Posthumanist Performativity: Towards an Understanding of How Matter Comes to 
Matter,” in Material Feminisms , ed. Stacy Alaimo (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2008), 816.
29 Navas, Remix Theory , 61.
30 Ibid., 160.
31 Ibid., 92–93.
32 Ibid., 109.
33 Francesca Coppa, “An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work,” Camera Obscura  26, no. 
2 77 (January 1, 2011): 123.
34 Kristina Busse and Alexis Lothian, “Scholarly Critiques and Critiques of Scholarship: The Uses of Remix 
Video,” Camera Obscura  26, no. 2 77 (January 1, 2011): 141.
35 Coppa, “An Editing Room of One’s Own,” 124.
36 Ibid., 128.
37 Francesca Coppa, “Interview with Elisa Kreisinger,” Transformative Works and Cultures  5 (July 15, 2010), 
doi:10.3983/twc.v5i0.234.
38 Renee Slajda, “‘Don’t Blame the Media, Become the Media’: Feminist Remix as Utopian Practice,” 
Barnard Centre for Research on Women Blog , May 30, 2013.
39 Elisa Kreisinger, “Queer Video Remix and LGBTQ Online Communities,” Transformative Works and 
Cultures  9 (September 30, 2011), doi:10.3983/twc.v9i0.395.
40 Ibid.
41 Martin Leduc, “The T wo-source Illusion: How Vidding Practices Changed Jonathan McIntosh’s Political 
Remix Videos,” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (September 30, 2011), doi:10.3983/twc.v9i0.379.
42 Miller, Rhythm Science , 37.
43 Ibid., 24.
44 Ibid., 61.
45 Amerika, remixthebook , 26.
46 Ibid., 28.
47 Ibid., 47.
48 Ibid., 58.
49 It first appeared as a concept in Foucault’s History of Sexuality  (1976). Michel Foucault, The History of 
Sexuality: The Will to Knowledge  (New York: Penguin Books, 2008).
50 Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977 , ed. Colin Gordon, 
1st American ed. (New York: Vintage, 1980), 194–195.
51 Ibid., 196. In Agamben’s vision the apparatus is an all-oppressive formation, one from which human 
beings stand outside. Here he creates new binaries between inside/outside and material/discursive that 
might not be helpful for the posthuman vision of the apparatus. See, Giorgio Agamben, What Is an 
Apparatus? And Other Essays  (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009), 14.
52 Gilles Deleuze, “What Is a Dispositif?” in Michel Foucault, Philosopher: Essays , ed. Timothy J. Armstrong 
(Chichester, UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992).
53 Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway , 141–142.
54 Ibid., 334.
55 John Bryant, The Fluid Text: A Theory of Revision and Editing for Book and Screen  (Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press, 2002).
268
J. ADEMA56 Look for example at the way the PhD student as a discoursing subject is being (re)produced by the dis -
sertation and by the dominant discourses and practices that accompany it. Janneke Adema, “Practise 
What You Preach: Engaging in Humanities Research through Critical Praxis,” International Journal of 
Cultural Studies  16, no. 5 (September 1, 2013): 491–505.
57 Amerika, remixthebook , xi.
58 Ibid., xiv–xv.
59 Gary Hall, “Better Living through Sharing: Living Books About Life and Other Open Media Projects,” 
Media Gifts , June 17, 2012, http://garyhall.squarespace.com/journal/2012/6/17/better-living-through-
sharing-living-books-about-life-and-ot.html.
60 Ibid.
61 Gary Hall, “Fluid Notes on Liquid Books,” in Putting Knowledge to Work and Letting Information Play: The 
Center for Digital Discourse and Culture , edited by Timothy W . Luke and Jeremy Hunsinger (Blacksburg, 
VA: The Center for Digital Discourse and Culture, 2009), 43.
62 Janneke Adema and Gary Hall, “The Political Nature of the Book: On Artists’ Books and Radical Open 
Access,” New Formations  78, no. 1 (2013), 138.
Bibliography 
Adema, Janneke. “Practise What You Preach: Engaging in Humanities Research through Critical 
Praxis.” International Journal of Cultural Studies  16, no. 5 (1 September 2013): 491–505. 
——, and Gary Hall. “The Political Nature of the Book: On Artists’ Books and Radical Open Access.” 
New Formations  78, no. 1 (2013): 138–156.
Agamben, Giorgio. What Is an Apparatus? And Other Essays . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2009.
Amerika, Mark. remixthebook . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Barad, Karen. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and 
Meaning . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007.
——. “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.” Signs  
28, no. 3 (1 March 2003): 801–831.
——. “Posthumanist Performativity. Towards an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.” In 
Material Feminisms , edited by Stacy Alaimo. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2008.
Braidotti, Rosi. “On Putting the Active Back into Activism.” New Formations  68, no. 1 (2010): 42–57.
Bryant, John. The Fluid Text: A Theory of Revision and Editing for Book and Screen . Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press, 2002.
Busse, Kristina, and Alexis Lothian. “Scholarly Critiques and Critiques of Scholarship: The Uses of 
Remix Video.” Camera Obscura  26, no. 2 77 (1 January 2011): 139–146. 
Coppa, Francesca. “An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work.” Camera Obscura  26, 
no. 2 77 (1 January 2011): 123–130.
——. “Interview with Elisa Kreisinger.” Transformative Works and Cultures  5 (15 July 2010). doi:10.3983/
twc.v5i0.234.
Deleuze, Gilles. “What Is a Dispositif?” In Michel Foucault, Philosopher: Essays , edited by Timothy J. 
Armstrong. Chichester, UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992.
Dolphijn, Rick, and Iris van der Tuin. New Materialism: Interviews & Cartographies  (Ann Arbor, MI: 
Open Humanities Press, 2012), http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.11515701.0001.001 (accessed 
August 6, 2014). 
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality: The Will to Knowledge . New York: Penguin Books, 2008.
——. Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977 . Edited by Colin Gordon, 
1st American edition. New York: Vintage, 1980.
Hall, Gary. “Better Living through Sharing: Living Books about Life and Other Open Media Projects.” 
Media Gifts , 17 June 2012. http://garyhall.squarespace.com/journal/2012/6/17/better-living-
through-sharing-living-books-about-life-and-ot.html (accessed August 6, 2014).
269
CUTTING SCHOLARSHIP TOGETHER/APART——. “Fluid Notes on Liquid Books.” In Putting Knowledge to Work and Letting Information Play: The 
Center for Digital Discourse and Culture  edited by Timothy W . Luke and Jeremy Hunsinger. 
Blacksburg, VA: The Center for Digital Discourse and Culture, 2009.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York 
University Press, 2008.
Kember, Sarah, and Joanna Zylinska. Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital Process . Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Kreisinger, Elisa. “Queer Video Remix and LGBTQ Online Communities.” Transformative Works and 
Cultures  9 (30 September 2011). doi:10.3983/twc.v9i0.395.
Leduc, Martin. “The T wo-Source Illusion: How Vidding Practices Changed Jonathan McIntosh’s 
Political Remix Videos.” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (30 September 2011). doi:10.3983/
twc.v9i0.379.
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008.
Miller, Paul D. Rhythm Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
Navas, Eduardo. “Notes on Everything Is a Remix, Part 1 , 2, and 3.” Remix Theory , September 3, 2011. 
http://remixtheory.net/?p=480 (accessed August 6, 2014).
——. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
Nesheim, Elisabeth. “Remixed Culture/Nature: Is Our Current Remix Culture Giving Way to a 
Remixed Nature?” presented at UIB: DIKULT 303 Remix Culture, November 2009.
Slajda, Renee. “‘Don’t Blame the Media, Become the Media’: Feminist Remix as Utopian Practice.” 
Barnard Centre for Research on Women Blog , 30 May 2013. http://bcrw.barnard.edu/blog/dont-blame-
the-media-become-the-media-feminist-remix-as-utopian-practice/ (accessed August 6, 2014).
Van der Tuin, Iris. “‘A Different Starting Point, a Different Metaphysics’: Reading Bergson and Barad 
Diffractively.” Hypatia  26, no. 1 (February 2011): 22–42.
19
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR 
USE IN REMIX
From Alarmism to Action
Patricia Aufderheide
Video remixing has grown rapidly from a semiexpert act to a broadly participatory one 
infusing daily life. Its growth has been pervaded with a discourse of criminality, with 
practitioners who proudly call themselves pirates, showcases with names like “Illegal 
Art,” endless listserv discussions of often-bogus copyright lore, and meaningless but well-
intentioned placatory messages on YouTube denying any intent to infringe. This has 
been accompanied by corporate alarmism around piracy, takedown notices online that 
do not distinguish between legal and illegal uses of unlicensed material, inappropriate 
cease-and-desist letters, overreaching terms of service, and sometimes-confusing and 
categorical warnings against copying.1
In the same time period, the importance of fair use (and, in other nations, exceptions 
such as fair dealing and right to quotation) has been ever more recognized in courts and 
in legal scholarship. Much of what is being produced in remix video has a good case for 
fair use, particularly since so many uses echo long-standing artistic practices in other 
media.
Despite endemic alarmism, there is an extremely low level of litigation around remix -
ing. There are no instances of copyright holders suing reusers of copyrighted material on 
YouTube after a takedown incident, even after a creator responded to the takedown by 
asserting fair use rights. T wo lawsuits regarding YouTube were initiated by reusers them -
selves: journalist and home-video maker Stephanie Lenz2 and legal scholar Lawrence 
Lessig,3 asserting that stakeholders wantonly overreached their rights in issuing a take -
down notice without first having a human being check to see if the use was legitimate. 
In nations where “three strikes” or other punitive legislation was tried,4 it has either 
been withdrawn, as in France5 or simply has not been effective.6
ContentID matches (Google’s preemptive search for copyrighted materials indepen -
dently of copyright holders) and takedowns (copyright holder-initiated complaints to 
Google) of copyright-protected material on YouTube, which are constant, result from 
robotic acts triggered by algorithms. They can be easily challenged, with work reinstated 
promptly, by asserting fair use rights. Users who knew they had the right to do so would 
also be in a position to work together, either as consumers confronting providers who 
refuse to employ human intelligence to discern fair use, or challenging lawmakers to 
271
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIXaffect policy, such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), more friendly to 
the creation of culture.
But people would have to know that they have fair use rights, and that those rights 
can be exercised without unacceptable risk. The most common reason that users find it 
difficult to assert their fair use rights is that they are unsure how to interpret the law. 
Even when they are familiar enough with fair use to employ it in remix, when they are 
challenged with a takedown notice, most makers do not challenge with a counter-take -
down after seeing a forbidding legal notice that makes them wonder if they were right. 
Further, as Peter Decherney has noted, wrangling between corporate entities such as 
Google and Viacom over financial arrangements has made things worse: “the mixed 
signals sent out by media companies have introduced confusion into fair use communi -
ties that had long-standing traditions of using copyrighted material.”7
This problem with exercising rights under the law is ignored at the peril of the future 
of culture. Earlier research with other communities of practice demonstrates the power 
of self-censorship to limit the creative possibilities of a field of action.8 The self-crimi -
nalization of remix video makers, however glamorous in the short term, constrains 
expression today and crimps its future. This realization was an impetus for legal scholar 
Rebecca Tushnet to form, with film studies professor Francesca Coppa and others, the 
Organization for Transformative Works (OTW),9 to assert the fair use rights of people 
who make fan fiction and other work. It is also a motivation for the nonprofit organiza -
tion, Public Knowledge, with its focus on remix in its annual World’s Fair Use Day.10
This chapter describes how some remixers have been able to strengthen their under -
standing of the law and increase legal exercise of their rights, without impairing their 
monopoly rights under copyright, or those of others.
Fair Use
Copyright law is national, and the nation in which work is created is the nation whose 
law applies. Whatever the national regime, copyright law always puts limits on copyright 
monopoly holders’ rights, although the logic by which policies limit them differs from 
country to country. By limiting the monopoly rights of copyright holders, such limita -
tions and exceptions effectively protect freedom of speech. As the writers of the 
American constitution noticed, they limit the private censorship capacity of copyright 
holders, who otherwise could forbid anyone to use their material without their permis -
sion.11 Exceptions have become ever more important as the limits on copyright brought 
by the need to register, by the traditional short length of copyright monopolies, and by 
limits on derivative rights have gradually fallen away.
The benefits of copyright law have, especially in the last decades, been dramatically 
tilted in most Northern nations toward copyright holders.12 Copyright is typically the 
default status for anything now created in tangible form; terms are extremely long (70–
90 years after the death of the author) and derivative rights apply. So, almost everything 
in the culture is effectively copyrighted forever, in practical terms. Specific exceptions 
and limitations become the escape hatch from owners’ private censorship, and have 
come under renewed scrutiny by creators needing access to copyrighted material.
The US fair use provision is often the default exception internationally for business, 
since it is widely assumed that if work is seen as fair use in the US, it will not be con -
tested elsewhere. Fair use also exists in the Philippines and Israel, and has been highly 
regarded in copyright reform discussion elsewhere. Canadian copyright reform has 
272
P . AUFDERHEIDEresulted in a redefinition of fair dealing to be, if anything, even more flexible than fair 
use.13 Australian reform discussion currently features the option of fair use prominently. 
In the UK, Prime Minister David Cameron has suggested that incorporating fair use into 
British law would be crucial for innovation.14 The 2011 Hargreaves report, while even -
tually advising against it, recommended measures that would do substantially the same 
thing.15 In Scandinavia, as in South Africa, the right of quotation appears unchallenged 
as an avenue to access unlicensed copyrighted material.16 European scholars Hugenholtz 
and Senftleben have proposed copyright reform that would incorporate some of the 
flexibilities of US-style fair use at a European Union-wide level.17
Fair use is both flexible and powerful in its design. Section 107 of the US Copyright 
Act broadly asserts the right to use copyrighted material if the benefit to society (e.g., 
the creation of new culture) is greater than the private loss. Considerations include the 
nature of the original work, the nature of the new work, the amount taken, and the 
effect on the market (beyond mere loss of a licensing fee). The application of fair use, 
like many exceptions, is on a case-by-case basis. In practice, given recent case law, fair 
use involves two simple questions: (1) is the use transformative, or different from the 
original material? and (2) was the appropriate amount taken to match the new use—not 
too much or too little?18
Fair Use and Remix Video
Fair use is enormously valuable to remixers of all kinds. People who want to create 
something new will, whether they want to or not, sample (literally or abstractly) from 
their cultural surroundings. And when a digital work can freely and visibly circulate, 
authors need to be made aware, with an even greater urgency than in the analog era, of 
their rights to use material without permission.
Remixers often participate in a culture that typifies itself as novel, innovative, even 
revolutionary. Remixers herald the novel affordances of digital creation and transmis -
sion tools. And indeed those affordances dramatically change opportunities and the 
scale of those opportunities. But the uses to which remixers put existing material often 
conform to time-honored creative practices, recognized in law as appropriate for unli -
censed use under fair use.19 This was demonstrated in the area of online video, in a 2008 
American University study analyzing hundreds of online videos on YouTube and other 
video sites, which found many familiar transformative purposes for reuse of copyrighted 
material in remix (as well as other transformative purposes in videos that were not 
remixes).20
Satire and Parody
Parodies and satires in remix video spoof popular mass media in ways that demonstrate 
makers’ power over the material. In Lord of the Rings Was Too Long ,21 for instance, inter -
polated scenes rewrite a key moment in the story ( Figure 19.1 ). In this version, the men 
refuse to listen to the sensible suggestions of a young woman and doom themselves to a 
long, tortuous adventure rather than resolving the ring problem efficiently. In other 
cases, parodies and satires sometimes make political comments. In Bush vs. the Zombies ,22 
video footage of President Bush at a press conference is reedited with added comments 
from a fake journalist, to make it seem as though Bush is talking about zombies instead 
of terrorists. If Dick Cheney Was Scarface23 combines Cheney press conference news 
273
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIXfootage with the voice and images from the mouth of Al Pacino, in order to satirize the 
vice president as a criminal.
Negative or Critical Commentary
Whatever the form of commentary, use of unauthorized copyrighted material for this 
purpose has long-standing legal recognition as fair use. We found video commonly 
quoted in critique, whether political or cultural. For instance, a Daily Kos entry, Fox 
News: Oil and Adventure in the Arctic!24 includes embedded videos in its criticism of the 
Fox News coverage of the melting ice caps ( Figure 19.2 ). The blog post excoriates Fox 
News for its current and past coverage of climate change. Another common form of 
critique is the mashup that quotes copyrighted works in order to create a metacommen -
tary. For instance, in Clint Eastwood’s The Office ,25 clips from the TV show The Office  
and the movie Evan Almighty  are used to show (and thus make a snarky comment about 
Eastwood), in the movie preview format, what The Office  would be like if it had been 
directed by Clint Eastwood. Less pointedly, in Re-Inventing Culture ,26 video artist Mark 
Cantwell juxtaposes clips from 24 artists’ music and hundreds of images drawn from 
popular culture sources—such as classic films, music videos, television performances, 
Figure 19.1   “Lord of the Rings Was Too Long” makes a funny feminist critique of 
Tolkien (courtesy of Oren Brimer on YouTube)
274
P . AUFDERHEIDEscientific films, and advertisements—to make a comment about popular culture and its 
creative capacities.
Positive Commentary
Unauthorized quotation of copyrighted material for celebratory purposes may be just as 
defensible under fair use as it has been in analog environments, depending most importantly 
on its transformativeness. This kind of work, including fan tributes, shows the flip side of 
negative or parodic impulses toward popular commercial culture, while evincing the same 
desire to participate, contribute, and make one’s mark upon it. Internet People27 is a celebra -
tion of online video creations themselves. The celebrated 7 Minute Sopranos28 by Paul Gulyas 
and Joe Sabia (eventually blessed by HBO, which also hired Sabia to work in new media) 
provides a punchy, condensed version of the dark, twisted plot lines of the TV series.
Illustration or Example
Such uses are widely eligible for fair use, and such use was pervasive in all kinds of 
videos in our study. In some cases, quotation for illustration was at the core of the 
Figure 19.2   A remixer critiques biased coverage of climate change (source: Page van der 
Linden for Daily Kos)
275
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIXvideo’s meaning. Evolution of Dance29 quotes popular music from a succession of fads, 
matching them with dance styles of that moment. All the quoted music in Evolution  
is quoted as illustration of the maker’s point about the evolution of popular music 
over time. In other cases, images and video are used to illustrate independent argu -
ments of some kind. For instance, one man’s rant against Oprah Winfrey’s choice of 
other online video makers (rather than himself or his favorites) to feature on her 
television show, What the Buck—to Oprah with Love ,30 includes photographs of 
Oprah, other celebrities, and related images captured from YouTube to illustrate his 
remarks.
Incidental Use
Merely incidental use is available for fair use consideration. This is common, indeed 
seemingly unavoidable, in uses of copyrighted material, which often contains other 
copyrighted content. Copyrighted material sometimes appears in online videos that 
record something else—for instance, the Lenz video referenced in the Fair Use section 
Figure 19.3   “Internet People” celebrates online video (courtesy of ChannelFrederator 
on YouTube)
276
P . AUFDERHEIDEof this chapter, Let’s Go Crazy #1 ,31 is a video of 
an 18-month-old child dancing to Prince’s song 
Let’s Go Crazy . The online environment abounds 
with the incidental use of the copyrighted song 
Happy Birthday, as families celebrate the occa -
sion. When this material gets remixed, the copy -
righted content is inevitably carried along, 
although it was never affirmatively selected.
Pastiche or Collage
Collage and pastiche are time-honored practices, evident in remix culture as well, which 
are eligible for fair use to the extent that there is transformative and appropriate use of 
the copyrighted material. Although all remix juxtaposes preexisting media to create new 
meaning, some is done without any clear intent to comment on the original (which 
would make it fall into one of the categories of satire, parody, criticism, or celebration). 
Instead, makers express their own identities by advertising their frames of cultural refer -
ence and affinity. Many online memes share this characteristic. In some mashups, music 
and sound effects are freely quoted in order to create or enhance meaning. For instance 
in one of the most widely viewed online mashups, the five-second Dramatic Chipmunk32 
video of a prairie dog (itself appropriated from a children’s television program) is accom -
panied by horror movie music to create an audiovisual joke. The meme Downfall/Hitler 
Reacts33 has served to make jokes about everything from office politics to fair use.
Codes of Best Practices
In many fields, codes of best practices establish an outline of what is acceptable fair 
use to peers, and thus lower perceived risk in situations where some degree of risk is 
unavoidable.34 Such codes, also called statements or sets of principles, have had enor -
mous impact in the creative work and lives of the professionals who use them, and 
have changed business practices. For the professional communities that have created 
them, codes of best practices provide the norm-setting standard for individual 
practitioners.
The value of such codes rests in their mode of creation. They are not expert dicta, but 
genuine expressions of professional communities’ shared values, which have linked the 
terms of the law to the requirements of the profession’s mission. This is valuable because, 
as legal scholar Michael Madison has meticulously demonstrated,35 courts inevitably 
must, explicitly or implicitly, refer to a community’s practice to understand the implica -
tions of a cultural activity. Unlike a set of (typically negotiated) fair use guidelines, 
which have been shown to have a constraining effect,36 a code of best practices is created 
in a bottom-up process by the field itself, and without asking permission from major 
copyright holding interests that affect the field.
This process has become fairly standard since documentary filmmakers became the 
first professional community to make the attempt, by beginning to create what became 
their “Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use” in 2004, with the sponsorship of five 
national organizations in the field. The process was designed and facilitated by Peter 
Jaszi and myself. It typically begins with research on community practices, conducted by 
survey or interview of practitioners; convening of practitioners to discuss common See Chapter 34  for xtine bur -
rough and Emily Erickson’s 
discussion on using Lenz’s 
Let’s Go Crazy  video as an 
opportunity to teach remix, 
fair use, and appropriation in 
the classroom.
277
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIXscenarios in which fair use is eligible, to discover mission-related purposes and limita -
tions on use; formation of a code of best practices by facilitators; review by a legal advi -
sory team and national associations; and release. All codes of best practices are organized 
by situation. They describe common situations in which fair use is relevant to the mis -
sion and activities of a particular field, articulate the principle justifying fair use, and 
describe the limitations on such use.
There have been measureable results from the creation of such codes. In documentary 
filmmaking, where obtaining errors and omissions insurance is the filmmaker’s responsi -
bility, filmmakers had long been unable to obtain such insurance for fair use claims. 
Within a year of issuing the “Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in 
Fair Use,”37 they found that every insurer of documentaries in the US accepted fair use 
claims within the general terms of the policy. One can now obtain such insurance with 
no incremental cost, thus showing that insurers value the risk taken by accepting claims 
within the bounds of the filmmakers’ code to be effectively zero.
Filmmakers have been able to circulate works that rely heavily upon fair use, such as 
Kirby Dick’s feature documentary This Film Is Not Yet Rated ,38 which includes 134 clips, 
none of which are accompanied by clearances, of major motion pictures in its critique 
of the Motion Picture Association of America’s (MPAA) ratings system. They have 
been able to do their work in ways they might not have previously attempted; The 
Interrupters ,39 for instance, a Kartemquin Films feature documentary by Steve James, 
employs excerpts from a wide range of media in its story about grassroots antiviolence 
efforts in Chicago, and Barbara Kopple’s documentary Gun Fight ,40 about the gun control 
debate, features thoughtful use of popular culture imagery.
After poets and scholars created their codes, individual authors used the codes in 
discussions with publishers. Among the publishers who have changed their approach to 
fair use, from a default-permissions policy to a fair-use-is-possible approach, are 
Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press. Blackwell’s, an international 
academic publisher, issues a policy statement to its authors that it assumes uncleared 
material is being used under fair use or the exemption standard in the Commonwealth, 
fair dealing. The University of Chicago Press has become markedly more fair-use 
friendly. One recent scholarly book, Geoff Kaplan’s Power to the People: The Graphic 
Design of the Radical Press and the Rise of the Counter-Culture, 1964–1974 , heavily depends 
upon fair use.
Open courseware began at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where 
the creators decided not to fight copyright battles at the outset. They only published 
educational materials that were either original or cleared, and all of it is available on the 
Web. Creators found that this excluded many courses, since professors routinely used 
copyrighted material for purposes ranging from illustration to demonstration and often 
encountered it incidentally. Many courses ended up as “skeletons”—mere outlines—
because of these limitations. Others, creators said in the sessions I cofacilitated, looked 
like “Swiss cheese” making it impossible for students to learn. Once they created their 
code of best practices, at MIT alone 31 new courses were uploaded within the first year. 
The course designers also established a visual convention to identify all fair use material, 
which was properly sourced with a warning to users that this content was not covered 
under the university’s Creative Commons licensing, which applied to the rest of the 
course.
In English classrooms across the US, students who had long been told that they could 
not send their video work out for national student competitions unless all third-party 
278
P . AUFDERHEIDEwork was cleared, are now employing the “Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Media 
Literacy Education”41 to make their own decisions, with their mentors, on the nature of 
their use. They are able to post their work online, show it at school events, and apply to 
competitions, all of which were previously off-limit activities.
Code of Best Practices for Fair Use in Online Video
The burgeoning of remix video, accompanied by a plethora of takedowns on YouTube, 
led to the formation of a project in 2008, led by myself and Peter Jaszi, to create a “Code 
of Best Practices in Fair Use for Online Video.”42 An earlier convening of lawyers, legal 
scholars, and industry actors at the American University had resulted in strong recom -
mendations for such a code.43 Research into common uses of copyrighted material for 
uses clearly eligible for fair use consideration, discussed above, further reinforced the 
logic of creating such a code. Remix in online video was not, however, a professional 
practice—far from it. It was diffused throughout the culture. There was no national 
association of remixers. There was no dominant professional body of practice that nicely 
represented the sprawling creative energy evident on YouTube. There was no business 
model.
As a result of consultation with professionals who had been involved in the study and 
in earlier projects, a high-level interdisciplinary committee of experts in two areas was 
formed: popular culture and copyright law. The scholars of popular culture understood 
firsthand both the kind of work being created in this participatory environment and the 
motivations behind it—and often sympathized passionately with new media makers. 
Legal scholars (with one entertainment industry lawyer, Michael Donaldson) under -
stood the recent history of fair use practice and litigation, and the historical arguments 
justifying fair use in an analog, professional, media environment. No one in the group 
had a direct market investment in the outcome.
The group met both via conference calls and email, using the common Web platform, 
Basecamp, over a period of four months. Initially, some of the lawyers struggled to fully 
grasp the new media environment. In this situation, finding analogies with more tradi -
tional media became important. Differences arose between cultural studies experts and 
legal experts over how the law might accommodate contemporary practices that—often 
on the Darknet (closed, private Internet sites)—went beyond conventional, established 
interpretations of fair use. In some cases, the group eventually agreed that such practices 
might fall beyond a code of best practices, although not necessarily beyond the doctrine 
of fair use.
“The Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Online Video”44 described fair use reasoning,  
stressed the importance of demonstrating good faith (for instance by attribution), and 
organized the presentation according to situations in which fair use questions typically 
emerge in current practice. These situations were drawn from the previous report analyz -
ing common uses of copyrighted material in remix work. They resulted in six 
situations:
 •commenting on or critiquing of copyrighted material;
 •using copyrighted material for illustration or example;
 •capturing copyrighted material incidentally or accidentally;
 •reproducing, reposting, or quoting in order to memorialize, preserve, or rescue an 
experience, an event, or a cultural phenomenon;
279
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIX •copying, reposting, and recirculating a work or part of a work for purposes of launching  
a discussion; and
 •quoting in order to recombine elements to make a new work that depends for its 
meaning on (often unlikely) relationships between the elements.
Each category was described—preferentially in traditional language, referencing analog 
creative practices—and provided with a general fair use principle with appropriate limi -
tations. Thus, users could apply the doctrine of fair use within a practice context.
Results
“The Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Online Video” was downloaded tens of 
thousands of times within the first two months of its publication, and was referenced on 
a variety of websites.45 The Code was brought to the attention of lawyers at Google as 
well. This contact resulted in Google funding the production of a video about the code: 
“Remix Culture: Fair Use Is Your Friend.”46 There have been no industry critiques of the 
Code, other than a nonlawyer’s disparagement of it on the website of the Copyright 
Alliance (funded by large copyright holders).47
Alan Watts wrote, “We seldom realize, for example that our most private thoughts 
and emotions are not actually our own. For we think in terms of languages and images 
which we did not invent, but which were given to us by our society.”48 Understanding 
fair use rights is an important part of the creative toolkit for those engaging in remix 
culture, and for those who think in terms of “languages and images which we did not 
invent.” Other approaches to expanding access to useable material—Creative Commons 
licenses, for example, which permit makers to share work more freely; the creation of 
digital databases of public domain material (mostly pre-1923); more efficient licensing 
and microlicensing practices—will also facilitate remix. But fair use is the tool that 
allows the legitimate, legal, and unlicensed use of material still under copyright, owned 
by someone who is not necessarily interested in sharing, and either unavailable or not 
willing to license it for that purpose. It enables culture to continue to grow, adapt, and 
change, and for innovation to flourish. Remix video is just one of the many ways in 
which fair use encourages cultural creation.
Notes
 1 Tarleton Gillespie, “Characterizing Copyright in the Classroom: The Cultural Work of Antipiracy 
Campaigns,” Communication, Culture & Critique  2, no. 3 (2009); William Patry, Moral Panics and the 
Copyright Wars  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009); Jason Mazzone, Copyfraud and Other Abuses 
of Intellectual Property Law  (Stanford, CA: Stanford Law Books, 2011); Joshua Fairfield, “Anti-Social 
Contracts: The Contractual Governance of Virtual Worlds,” McGill Law Journal  53, no. 3 (2008); Aram 
Sinnreich, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck, “Ethics Reconfigured,” Information, Communication & 
Society  12, no. 8 (2009); Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green, Spreadable Media: Creating Value 
and Meaning in a Networked Culture  (New York: New York University Press, 2013).
 2 “Lenz v. Universal” Electronic Frontier Foundation, https://www.eff.org/cases/lenz-v-universal (accessed 
February 28, 2014).
 3 “Lawrence Lessig Settles Fair Use Lawsuit Over Phoenix Music Snippets, Electronic Frontier Foundation,” 
https://www.eff.org/press/releases/lawrence-lessig-settles-fair-use-lawsuit-over-phoenix-music-snippets 
(accessed March 6, 2014).
 4 Eldar Haber, “The French Revolution 2.0: Copyright and the Three Strikes Policy,” Harvard Journal of 
Sports & Entertainment Law  2, no. 2 (2011).
280
P . AUFDERHEIDE 5 Ben Challis et al., “Third Strike Out,” The 1709 Blog , July 9, 2013 http://the1709blog.blogspot.fr/2013/07/
third-strike-struck-out.html (accessed August 7, 2014).
 6 Rebecca Giblin, “Evaluating Graduated Response,” Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts  37 (2014).
 7 Peter Decherney, Hollywood’s Copyright Wars: From Edison to the Internet  (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2012), 227.
 8 Patricia Aufderheide, Renee Hobbs, and Peter Jaszi, “The Cost of Copyright Confusion for Media 
Literacy” (Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 2007); Patricia 
Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, “The Good, the Bad and the Confusing: User-Generated Video Creators on 
Copyright” (Washington, DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 
2007); Peter DiCola and Kembrew McLeod, Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011).
 9 Organization for Transformative Works, http://transformativeworks.org/ (accessed February 28, 2014).
10 World’s Fair Use Day, http://worldsfairuseday.org/ (accessed on February 28, 2014).
11 Benjamin Kaplan, An Unhurried View of Copyright, Republished (and with Contributions from Friends)  
(Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender, 2005); Lewis Hyde, Common as Air: Revolution, Art, and 
Ownership  (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010).
12 James Boyle, The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind  (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2008); Kembrew McLeod, Freedom of Expression: Overzealous Copyright Bozos and Other Enemies of 
Creativity  (New York: Doubleday, 2005); David Bollier, Silent Theft: The Private Plunder of Our Common 
Wealth  (New York: Routledge, 2002); P . Bernt Hugenholtz, “Copyright, Contract and Code: What Will 
Remain of the Public Domain?” Brooklyn Journal of International Law  78 (2000).
13 Ariel Katz, “Fair Use 2.0: The Rebirth of Fair Dealing in Canada,” in The Copyright Pentalogy: How the 
Supreme Court of Canada Shook the Foundations of Canadian Copyright Law , ed. Michael A. Geist (Ottawa: 
Ottawa University Press, 2013).
14 “UK Copyright Laws to be Reviewed, Announces Cameron,” BBC News, last modified November 4, 
2010, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-11695416 (accessed August 7, 2014).
15 Ian Hargreaves, Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual Property and Growth  (London: Intellectual 
Property Office, 2011).
16 Sean Flynn and Peter Jaszi, “Untold Stories in South Africa: Creative Consequences of the Rights 
Clearance Culture for Documentary Filmmakers” ( American University, WCL Research Paper No. 2010-
23, Washington, DC: Program on Intellectual Property and the Public Interest, Washington College of 
Law, American University, 2010); Leif Ove Larsen and Torgeir Uberg Nærland, “Documentary in a 
Culture of Clearance: A Study of Knowledge of and Attitudes toward Copyright and Fair Use among 
Norwegian Documentary Makers,” Popular Communication  8, no. 1 (2010).
17 P . Bernt Hugenholtz and Martin R. F . Senftleben, “Fair Use in Europe: In Search of Flexibilities,” SSRN 
eLibrary (2011), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1959554.
18 Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright  (Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press, 2011); Neil Netanel, “Making Sense of Fair Use,” Lewis & Clark Law 
Review  15, no. 3 (2011); Michael J. Madison, “A Pattern-Oriented Approach to Fair Use,” William and 
Mary Law Review  45 (2004); Barton Beebe, “An Empirical Study of U.S. Copyright Fair Use Opinions, 
1978–2005,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review  156, no. 3 (2008).
19 Sinnreich, Latonero, and Gluck, “Ethics Reconfigured.”
20 Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, “Recut, Reframe, Recycle: Quoting Copyrighted Material in User-
Generated Video” (Washington, DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American 
University, 2008).
21 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJb9UV_HUWA (accessed August 7, 2014).
22 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IoXgRtDysLY (accessed August 7, 2014).
23 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2nPUjIW7i7k (accessed August 7, 2014).
24 http://www.dailykos.com/story/2007/10/08/395509/-Fox-News-Oil-and-Adventure-in-the-Arctic# 
(accessed August 7, 2014).
25 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPwmG3VuO_E (accessed August 7, 2014).
26 http://labs.divx.com/node/4390 and http://www.letztechance.org/read-21-2957.html?Re-Inventing%20
Culture%20-%20Mark%20Cantwell (accessed August 7, 2014).
27 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pPCkhYMQgY (accessed August 7, 2014).
28 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tz_Ees_-kE4 (accessed August 7, 2014).
29 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMH0bHeiRNg (accessed August 7, 2014).
30 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K3UQ0OuQLhs (accessed August 7, 2014).
281
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE IN REMIX31 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1KfJHFWlhQ (accessed August 7, 2014).
32 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Af-ezch1L4c (accessed August 7, 2014).
33 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WDKaO-2eur4 (accessed August 7, 2014).
34 Aufderheide and Jaszi, Reclaiming Fair Use ; http://cmsimpact.org/fair-use.
35 Madison, “A Pattern-Oriented Approach to Fair Use.”
36 Kenneth Crews, “The Law of Fair Use and the Illusion of Fair-Use Guidelines,” Ohio State Law Journal  
62 (2001).
37 “Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use,” Center for Media and Social Impact, 
http://www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/fair_use_final.pdf (accessed August 7, 2014).
38 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTL3XMDwY0c (accessed August 7, 2014).
39 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXmm0MZLGxY (accessed August 7, 2014).
40 “Interview with Barbara Kopple,” HBO Documentaries, http://www.hbo.com/documentaries/gun-fight#/ 
(accessed on February 28, 2014).
41 “The Code of Best Practices in Media Literacy Education,” Center for Media and Social Impact, http://
www.cmsimpact.org/fair-use/related-materials/codes/code-best-practices-fair-use-media-literacy-educa -
tion (accessed August 7, 2014).
42 “The Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Online Video,” Center for Media and Social Impact, http://
www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/online_best_practices_in_fair_use.pdf (accessed August 7, 2014).
43 Patricia Aufderheide, “Unauthorized: The Copyright Conundrum in Participatory Video” (Washington, 
DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 2007).
44 http://cmsimpact.org/fair-use/related-materials/codes/fair-use-and-online-video (accessed August 7, 
2014).
45 Including Revver, Boing Boing, and Jonathan McIntosh.
46 http://www.cmsimpact.org/fair-use/video/remix-culture-fair-use-your-friend and http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=tCpBhU16TzI (accessed August 7, 2014).
47 July 7, 2008, formerly available at: http://blog.copyrightalliance.org/2008/07/the-remix-culture/. Google 
lawyer William Patry responded acerbically, critiquing Ross’s ignorance and bravado as “chutzpah”: http://
williampatry.blogspot.com/2008/07/patrick-ross-and-fair-use.html (accessed August 7, 2014).
48 Alan Watts, The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are  (New York: Vintage, 1989), 53–54.
Bibliography
Aufderheide, Patricia. “Unauthorized: The Copyright Conundrum in Participatory Video.” 
Washington, DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 2007.
Aufderheide, Patricia, and Peter Jaszi. “Recut, Reframe, Recycle: Quoting Copyrighted Material in 
User-Generated Video.” Washington, DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, 
American University, 2008.
——. Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press, 2011.
——. “The Good, the Bad and the Confusing: User-Generated Video Creators on Copyright.” 
Washington, DC: Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 
2007.
Aufderheide, Patricia, Renee Hobbs, and Peter Jaszi. “The Cost of Copyright Confusion for Media 
Literacy.” Center for Social Media, School of Communication, American University, 2007.
Aufderheide, Patricia, Peter Jaszi, Tijana Milosevic, and Bryan Bello. “Copyright, Permissions, and Fair 
Use among Visual Artists and the Academic and Museum Visual Arts Communities: An Issue 
Report.” New York: College Art Association, 2014.
Beebe, Barton. “An Empirical Study of U.S. Copyright Fair Use Opinions, 1978–2005.” University of 
Pennsylvania Law Review 156, no. 3 (2008): 549–624.
Bollier, David. Silent Theft: The Private Plunder of Our Common Wealth . New York: Routledge, 2002.
Boyle, James. The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind . New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2008.
Crews, Kenneth. “The Law of Fair Use and the Illusion of Fair-Use Guidelines.” Ohio State Law Journal 
62 (2001): 98.
282
P . AUFDERHEIDEDecherney, Peter. Hollywood’s Copyright Wars: From Edison to the Internet . New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2012.
DiCola, Peter, and Kembrew McLeod. Creative License: The Law and Culture of Digital Sampling . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Donaldson, Michael. “Fair Use: What a Difference a Decade Makes.” Journal of the Copyright Society of 
the U.S.A. 57, no. 3 (2010): 331–335.
Fairfield, Joshua. “Anti-Social Contracts: The Contractual Governance of Virtual Worlds.” McGill 
Law Journal 53, no. 3 (2008): 427–476.
Falzone, Anthony, and Jennifer Urban. “Demystifying Fair Use: The Gift of the Center for Social 
Media Statements of Best Practices.” Journal of the Copyright Society of the U.S.A. 57, no. 3 (2010): 
337–350.
Flynn, Sean, and Peter Jaszi. “Untold Stories in South Africa: Creative Consequences of the Rights 
Clearance Culture for Documentary Filmmakers.” American University, WCL Research Paper No. 
2010-23. Washington, DC: Program on Intellectual Property and the Public Interest, Washington 
College of Law, American University, 2010.
Giblin, Rebecca. “Evaluating Graduated Response.” Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts 37 (2014): 
147–209 .
Gillespie, Tarleton. “Characterizing Copyright in the Classroom: The Cultural Work of Antipiracy 
Campaigns.” Communication, Culture & Critique 2, no. 3 (2009): 274–318.
Haber, Eldar. “The French Revolution 2.0: Copyright and the Three Strikes Policy.” Harvard Journal 
of Sports & Entertainment Law 2, no. 2 (2011): 297–339.
Hargreaves, Ian. Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual Property and Growth . London: Intellectual 
Property Office, 2011.
Hugenholtz, P . Bernt. “Copyright, Contract and Code: What Will Remain of the Public Domain?” 
Brooklyn Journal of International Law 78 (2000): 77–90.
Hugenholtz, P . Bernt, and Martin R. F . Senftleben, “Fair Use in Europe: In Search of Flexibilities,” 
SSRN eLibrary, 2011, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1959554.
Hyde, Lewis. Common as Air: Revolution, Art, and Ownership . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 
2010.
Jenkins, Henry, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a 
Networked Culture . New York: New York University Press, 2013.
Kaplan, Benjamin. An Unhurried View of Copyright, Republished (and with Contributions from Friends) . 
Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender, 2005.
Katz, Ariel. “Fair Use 2.0: The Rebirth of Fair Dealing in Canada.” In The Copyright Pentalogy: How 
the Supreme Court of Canada Shook the Foundations of Canadian Copyright Law , edited by Michael A. 
Geist, 93–156. Ottawa: Ottawa University Press, 2013.
Larsen, Leif Ove, and Torgeir Uberg Nærland. “Documentary in a Culture of Clearance: A Study of 
Knowledge of and Attitudes toward Copyright and Fair Use among Norwegian Documentary 
Makers.” Popular Communication 8, no. 1 (2010): 46–60.
Madison, Michael J. “A Pattern-Oriented Approach to Fair Use.” William and Mary Law Review 45 
(2004): 1525.
Mazzone, Jason. Copyfraud and Other Abuses of Intellectual Property Law . Stanford, CA: Stanford Law 
Books, 2011.
McLeod, Kembrew. Freedom of Expression: Overzealous Copyright Bozos and Other Enemies of Creativity . 
New York: Doubleday, 2005.
Netanel, Neil. “Making Sense of Fair Use.” Lewis & Clark Law Review 15, no. 3 (2011): 715–772.
Patry, William. Moral Panics and the Copyright Wars . New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Sinnreich, Aram, Mark Latonero, and Marissa Gluck. “Ethics Reconfigured.” Information, 
Communication & Society 12, no. 8 (2009): 1242–1260.
Watts, Alan. The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are . New York: Vintage, 1989.
28320
I THOUGHT I MADE A 
VID, BUT THEN YOU 
TOLD ME THAT I DIDN’T
Aesthetics and Boundary Work in the 
Fan-Vidding Community
Katharina Freund
Holy crap, vids are serious business.
Anonymous LiveJournal user, on Fail  
Fandom Anon, LiveJournal community, 2010
After attending VividCon, the holy grail of fan-vidding conventions held in Chicago in 
2009, I returned home to Australia with a grin on my face. I had been enthralled by the 
friendliness and enthusiasm of the vidders I met, and felt like I had become part of a 
unique online community. Exhausted after many hours of vid-watching, panel discus -
sions, dance parties, and interviews, I was shocked to discover that the online commu -
nity of vidders on LiveJournal had erupted into discord during my travels home. 
Arguments and retractions, comments and private messages had flown around discussing 
the changing nature of the vidding community. Due to the egocentric organization of 
LiveJournal,1 I only had access to sections of this debate: much of it occurred behind 
members-only discussions or in private messages or emails. But the debate swirled around 
the changing aesthetics of vids, and the changing membership of the vidding commu -
nity in an event that later became known on LiveJournal as “Vid Fail 2009.”2
This chapter explores the complex community negotiations which occurred as a result 
of this event. Based on two years of ethnographic research conducted in the online and 
face-to-face spaces of the vidders, it discusses how this community orients itself around 
the perception of a shared history and shared aesthetic traditions.
Introduction to Vidding Practices
Technically speaking, a fan video (or vid) is a type of remix that takes footage from film 
or television and edits it to music in order to tell a story about that film or television 
text. Many vids focus on romantic narratives about two characters from a particular text, 
284
K. FREUNDsuch as Harry and Hermione from Harry Potter  or Bella and either Jacob or Edward (or 
both) from Twilight . A common subset of the theme, known as slash, involves homoe -
rotic romances such as Kirk and Spock from Star Trek . Type any of those sets of names 
into YouTube and a bevy of videos will appear, all of which match the above 
description.
The act of vidding, however, is a lot more complex for the vidders I studied. There is 
a negotiation at play in the vidding community about who gets to be “in” and what types 
of videos fit their understanding of what makes a vid. These boundaries between what 
is and is not a vid, and who is and is not a vidder, reveal the complex social and artistic 
arguments occurring beneath the surface of a productive group of remixers. In the case 
of the vidding community, relying mostly on the social-networking and blogging site 
Livejournal.com, these community boundaries are based along aesthetic, historical, and 
gendered lines. According to my research conducted from 2009 to 2011, more than 90 
percent of vidders on LiveJournal identify as female.
When I asked long-time vidder and “big name fan” Laura Shapiro to explain how 
anyone becomes a member of the vidding community, she detailed the multiplicity of 
vidding communities:
First of all, I don’t believe there is the vidding community, I believe that there 
are many vidding communities, most of which I probably have no idea about. I 
think it’s a big mistake to refer to the vidding community, I think when people 
say that they’re speaking from within a vidding community that I am a member 
of that is where vidding began, the community that grew out of vidding’s origins 
with Kandy Fong and out of slash fandom.3 What I’d call the traditional vidding 
community, and its offshoots. But even within this community, that people call 
the vidding community, that I call the traditional vidding community, there are 
many, many communities. And so defining—definitions are hard.4
Definitions are indeed difficult: The vidders themselves certainly cannot agree on 
what constitutes the core identity of this group. As noted by Bell, the term “com -
munity” functions as a descriptor, but it is also a normative and ideological term that 
carries a lot of baggage.5 The early cyber-enthusiast Howard Rheingold is most com -
monly quoted for his definition of online communities as “social aggregations that 
emerge from the Net when enough people carry on those public discussions long 
enough, with sufficient feeling, to form webs of personal relationships in cyber -
space.”6 Later critiques of Rheingold often denounced online communities as inau -
thentic, compensatory, and somehow lacking: sure “community” could not be so 
easily applied to digital groups, as they were so vastly different from face-to-face, 
“authentic” communities.7
Raymond Williams notes that the term “community” is particularly problematic: 
Unlike other terms for social organization such as “nation” or “society,” it is rarely used 
unfavorably and carries “warmly persuasive” connotations.8 The positive associations are 
noted by Baym who chose to use it precisely for its “warm, emotional resonance.”9 
According to Marshall, “The vagueness of the term is part of its power. It can unify 
because it is imprecise. Different people using the term may have different expectations, 
but they can all appear to be talking similarly.”10 As the term “community” represents 
an idea, its use to groups is obvious: It evokes commonality, support, and friendship, and 
it erases difference. The debates among vidders about just what constitutes their 
285
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . community and the powerful arguments supporting different viewpoints take advantage 
of these positive-yet-vague elements of the term.
For the purpose of this chapter, I am not interested in what “community” may mean, 
but rather what it means to the vidders. Following Marshall again, I believe “it is fruitless 
to search for the essence of community, but it is useful to see what enables a particular 
group to be so classified by its members.”11
Consider the following quotes from a questionnaire I conducted with the vidders during  
my ethnographic research:
Q:  Please add any comments you’d like to make on the vidding community, 
your online and offline friendships, or anything else you’d like to share here.
R1:  I have found the best friends of my adult life through vidding and fandom.
R2:  YouTube quality is crap. *pukes* If a vid is posted on YouTube, I most 
likely will NOT watch it. I’ve made great friends online that I could never 
have met offline and those friendships mean the world to me.
R3:  Vidders who care about quality and learning and constantly getting better 
are the only people I care about. The 12 year olds on YouTube are generally 
not in my orbit, and people who just throw crappy clips together and call 
it a vid or steal clips are not part of the vidding community I hang out in. 
I miss the days when it was smaller.
R4: There’s a strong sense of community I don’t see elsewhere.
Several of these respondents (R2, R3) define the vidding community in exclusionary and 
normative ways: by highlighting aspects of other, inferior vidding groups (namely, those on 
YouTube), the superiority of their vidding group is established. YouTubers are derided as young, 
frivolous, and unconcerned with quality, thereby setting up the LiveJournal (LJ) vidding com -
munity as mature, thoughtful, and serious about aesthetics and narrative standards.
This tension was obvious to many vidders, such as Australian vidder Boppy:
These are “centres” for vidding and people that “hang” in any of those places 
are members of the vidding community. However, I find these centres limiting 
as well. The truth is that many, many people vid completely separately—either 
on their own or in other communities online—and to pretend that the vidding 
community has clearly defined boundaries would be a lie.
After her LiveJournal page became the focal point of an argument about inclusion in 
the vidding community during Vid Fail 2009, Boppy reflected about where the bounda -
ries lie and how she felt her work and the work of many of her friends was excluded by 
more traditional members:
I had fans who do not have me friended, probably have never even heard of me 
before, show up and throw their weight around about what “is” and “isn’t” vid -
ding. I honestly don’t think they could see how their behavior came across but 
it’s exactly this sort of thing that makes people feel excluded—whether it’s 
because they’re a guy and people are going on and on about vidding being a 
“female” tradition, or whether it’s because they’ve made a vid that is reverential 
rather than “commenting on” the source and here are these famous, long-term 
fans telling them that that is “not vidding.”
286
K. FREUNDWhile the LiveJournal vidding community claims the term “vidding” as their own, 
Boppy and many of the commenters on her post pointed out that YouTubers and other 
remix artists commonly use the term to describe their own work. The message seen in 
Figure 20.1  was shared privately among many vidders and vid-fans during this debate.
When I used the terms “remix” and “new media” to define vidding on my LiveJournal, 
it caused significant disagreement in the comments. Traditional vidders argued that if 
the definition of the term was expanded to include other types of remixes made by other 
communities, it would constitute an erasure of the female-centered history. One such 
comment read:
I think that it is not just the traditional/old school vidders who would object to 
“new media form”—you don’t have to experience it first-hand to be proud and 
protective of vidding’s long history. “Remix” is not only a word not used by vidders, 
it’s a word that is going to make vidding seem much younger than its 30+ years.12
At the vidding conventions I attended, I was approached by several individuals who 
quizzed me on my knowledge of vidding history. I was taken aside, along with several 
other first-time convention attendees, and shown some of the oldest vids that still 
existed, and was taught about the “grandmothers” of vidding in hotel rooms and 
hallways.
Figure 20.1  “I thought I made a vid, but then you told me I didn’t” Internet meme
287
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . The Origins of Vidding
To a large extent, the origins of vidding have become mythologized by the community 
through their own efforts to document the history of their practice. VividCon (VVC), 
the central face-to-face social event of the vidding community, opens every year ritual -
istically with a “Genealogy of Vidding” vid show, which Coppa refers to as “an annual 
recitation of our history” for everyone at the convention.13 While there are usually two 
tracks of parallel programming at VVC, nothing is scheduled concurrently with the his -
tory vid show so that all the con-goers are able to attend. This event is one of self-
conscious community building, where the vidders come together to recount their origins 
and introduce newer vidders and vid watchers to the mythic origins.
According to the canonized version of fan-vidding history, vidding was created in 
1975 when a Star Trek  fan named Kandy Fong converted footage from her favorite series 
into 35mm slides, and used a slide carousel to click through the images in time to music. 
These proto-vid slideshows were shown live at conventions and in fan club meetings 
around the United States during the course of several years. “Fong began to videotape 
her results, partly because [ Star Trek creator Gene] Roddenberry wanted copies and 
partly because Fong herself became interested in creating records of fannish art.”14 Few 
of these slideshow vids are now accessible, although Fong’s very popular vid Both Sides 
Now  (first shown in 1980 and recorded in 1986) is often shown at conventions even 
today. It is probably the only slideshow vid that newer vidders are able to view because 
it has been made available online.15
These slideshow presentations inspired other fans to make similar works, so they 
turned to the VCR technology of the mid-1980s. As mentioned above, these early vids 
were often heavily influenced by slash fandom (such as Kirk/Spock in this period). This 
early VCR vidding period is covered extensively by Jenkins16 and Bacon-Smith17 and 
the vidders profiled in those works are now revered as the founders of contemporary 
vidding aesthetics. The members of the community during this time were mostly women. 
Many vids during the 1980s and 1990s were made by large groups of editors known as 
collectives, due to the high cost of VCR editing decks and the complexity of the tech -
nology. The process was incredibly time-consuming and required several people: stop -
watches and log books were used to keep track of the timing of clips needed in relation 
to the song used, as the VCR numerical counter rarely corresponded to an actual amount 
of time.
Despite the trouble, VCR vidder Gwyn fondly recalled her experiences vidding 
together with her collective:
So when you’re vidding with VCRs, basically someone would sit in front of the 
TV and the editing decks and push all the buttons, and we would all sit on the 
couch and give thumbs up or thumbs down to the clip choices, and stuff our 
faces full of junk food, drink copious amounts of soda  . . . It was a group activity, 
and we had these monthly bashes where we would do stuff other than vidding, 
just hang out  . . . We were all very close-knit.
The VCR vidders are highly regarded for their tenacity in creating vids using such intri -
cate methods, and these “good ol’ days” are also romanticized through such narratives. 
Tales of this camaraderie are often told in the convention spaces where the VCR and 
newer, digital vidders come into contact to highlight the differences between them. 
288
K. FREUNDVCR vidding was a friendly and communal creative practice, totally unlike that of 
modern vidders who work alone on computers that automatically process many of the 
elements that were formerly painstaking processes of manual labor.
By the time computer-aided vidding arrived in the late 1990s, VCR vidding was an 
established part of fandom culture, and had its own distinct discourse of aesthetics, 
analysis, and criticism (as explained in detail below). Despite the significant advantages 
digital vidding held over analog, the arrival of digital vids was not initially embraced. 
According to Melina, who was an early digital vidder:
Doing things with computers that you couldn’t do with a VCR was seen as 
flashy, and frequently unnecessarily flashy. It didn’t serve the vid, you were just 
showing off that you had a computer. Some of this I think was valid, but obvi -
ously lots of it was not.
Throughout the early and mid-2000s, vidding began to expand as the community shifted 
to communicating primarily through mailing lists on the Web. As vids were now shared 
online and more easily accessible, it became common for people to stumble across a vid 
posted on the Internet without already being a member of fandom. More and more vid -
ders from outside the United States began to appear: unable to attend the US-based 
conventions, these “feral” vidders interacted with each other solely online and were 
unaware of the accepted history of the community. It is interesting to consider the use 
of the term “feral”: somewhat disparaging, it indicates that these new vidders were seen 
as uncivilized and wild by traditional vidders. Gwyn was, and indeed still is, apprehen -
sive about these “newbie vidders”:
Q: Who are these newbie vidders, when did they arrive?
Gwyn:   [laughs] Well, it’s anyone who started vidding on computer! It was 
YouTube—YouTube really didn’t exist four years ago, and now it’s taken 
over the world! And then there were all these people who were coming in 
to vidding who had no idea there was this culture, there was this history. 
They thought they had invented it.
The arrival of YouTube in 2005 popularized and mainstreamed the practice of watching 
streaming video on the Web.18 New genres of remix, which also appropriated copy -
righted media, appeared quickly throughout this period, such as machinima (films made 
using video game engines), trailer mashups (creating a parody movie trailer by altering 
the genre), political remix videos, and many more. The closest relative of the vid, the 
anime music video (AMV) also migrated on to YouTube while maintaining its own 
domain, animemusicvideos.org. And some of these remix videos looked just like the vids 
made by vidders: new editors were cutting clips of television footage to music and post -
ing it on YouTube, entirely unaware of the existence of a vidding community which 
claimed a 30-year history. Many of these new editors were from different countries, 
backgrounds, and age groups than the traditional vidding community. There were also 
more men now creating remix videos they called “vids,” and the vids themselves also 
began to change as the influx brought new music, new aesthetic concerns, and also new 
types of edited imagery.
A tug-of-war between the established “vidding aesthetic” and these new forms began. 
This tension is played out through vidding reviews and commentary, both online and 
289
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . face-to-face at the vid review sessions during fan conventions. Most of the stylistic traits 
of LiveJournal vidding are flexible to an extent in the name of innovation and play. 
However, if a vid is seen to stray too far from the accepted traits, or includes faux-pas 
elements, then it is often critiqued as a “bad vid” or “not a vid.”
The source text is usually, but not always, science-fiction, fantasy, or a cult television 
series: Star Trek , The X-Files , Highlander , Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Supernatural , and 
Doctor Who  have all been heavily vidded, for example. Generally speaking, a traditional 
type of vid focuses on a relationship from the text (which can be part of the “canon” of 
the text, or constructed by fans) or on a particular character and their motivations and 
back story; these are the shipper vid and character study, respectively. Many vidders see 
this focus on characters and relationships as a particularly female way of understanding 
media texts, and as part of what makes vidding different from other types of remix vid -
eos. While some effects can be used, they should generally be in service of the story the 
vid is telling rather than just demonstrating a new visual technique.
There are certain traits, which vidders agree are important to a good vid, such as 
“going somewhere” with the story or telling a narrative, saying something new about a 
character, relationship, or storyline from the television show, or recontextualizing a 
well-known song through interesting juxtaposition with the televisual source.
The vid Displaced  by Canadian vidder Milly is a good example of a classic type of vid. 
Using footage from Heroes ,19 the vid explores the actions and motivations of the char -
acter Claire, and alludes to self-harm in Claire’s ability to heal from any wound. The 
vidder uses sparing special effects such as those shown in the frames represented by 
Figure 20.2 , and the emphasis is on the character’s development throughout the series.
The traits of a “bad vid” are much more concrete, but also less well-known, particu -
larly by newer vidders. For example, including black screen in the vid or showing the 
characters lips moving without dialog (known as “talky-face”) are agreed to be the  
hallmarks of a “bad vid.” Including too many flashy special effects, such as tinting the 
footage with a monochrome hue like orange or purple, are seen as unnecessary. This 
particular stylistic concern hearkens back to the earliest days of digital vidding, where 
VCR vidders were skeptical of effects that could not be accomplished via the VCR, and 
were thus not part of the accepted aesthetic style of vidding at the time.
The vidder jescaflowne, who came to vidding from the closely related AMV com -
munity, took these gaffes to the limit in the vid Another Sunday (Figures 20.3  and 20.4). 
Using footage from Stargate: Atlantis20 set to Jefferson Starship, jescaflowne uses every 
filter, cheesy effect, and slow-motion trick available. The vid was a surprise hit on the 
convention circuits for its over-the-top take on the source material.
Figure 20.2  Screenshots of Displaced  by Milly (courtesy of Milly)
Figure 20.3   Ronon Dex (Jason Momoa) sparkles in this screenshot from Another Sunday  
by jescaflowne (courtesy of jescaflowne)
Figure 20.4   The original shot of Teyla Emmagan (Rachel Luttrell) in Another Sunday is 
overlaid with a green color wash (courtesy of jescaflowne)
291
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . Interestingly, the fan-written wiki, Fanlore, points to the vidder’s origins in AMV 
editing as part of the reason as to why it is different from traditional vids:
Another Sunday  is also representative of the anime music video [amv] aesthetic 
as applied to live action vidding;  . . . Jescaflowne comes to live action by way of 
amvs, and brings a fast-cutting, highly spectacular, colorful and almost cartoon -
ish style to live action footage.21
While the vid was wildly popular when it premiered, it is remembered for toeing the line 
between what is acceptable for vids and what is more common in other remix video 
communities.
Many newer vidders expressed confusion at the feedback they received in reviews, as 
the aesthetic rules they were breaking were not clear to them. For example, Keerawa 
premiered one of her first vids at VividCon in Chicago, and was surprised at the negative 
reaction to the inclusion of a voiceover she had recorded at the beginning and end of 
the vid: “I think I’m breaking some really big rule that I didn’t even know existed.” This 
was echoed by several other vidders, including Vinny who similarly felt like she was 
violating a rule that she had never heard of when she used the black screen in her first 
vid premiere at VividCon:
I’m still struggling to get to know more about the genre, about the history of it. 
During the critique, one of the mentions was that apparently using lots of black 
footage is like breaking wind in an elevator! [laughs] Before this I had no idea 
that was a faux pas, I mean I’d read stuff in comments [on LJ] saying you 
shouldn’t use lots of white flashes but I guess this is just telling me I still have a 
ton to learn.
One vidder known for pushing the boundaries of what is acceptable commented, “It’s 
been said that I’m fearless, which is kind of true. But it’s more that I don’t realize when 
I should be fearful or resist.”22
A long-time vidder, who had previously worked in the AMV community, pointed out 
that the vids that get roundly panned at the vid review panel at the conventions tend 
to be those that include aesthetic elements that the community is not familiar with:
Chloe: I wouldn’t say it’s reluctant to change, because I don’t think it is at all, 
it changes all the time, but it’s a community that’s very wide in ages, so you have 
those really young people who are probably exploring more and trying new 
things, and the community that’s in a really safe place, where it doesn’t really 
want to—I mean, it knows what it wants to do and it’s willing to evolve in that 
line, but it takes a little probing to send them exploring.
This is also at work in the vidding community: I heard much discussion as to the differ -
ences between LiveJournal and YouTube vidders, and between LiveJournal vidders and 
AMV editors as well. In these discussions, vidding was said to be older, more critical, 
thoughtful, and less focused on special effects. In his work on the free software move -
ment, David Berry analyzed the specific discourses that were being employed by different 
groups.23 The use of terms such as “we” and “they” help the different software groups 
define their boundaries between the in-group and the out-group. When reading the 
292
K. FREUNDmaterial published by these groups, he notes, “These subject positions are treated as a 
dichotomy and the reader is assumed to be supportive of the FSF [Free Software 
Foundation] objectives, a friend and colleague—or if not, an enemy.”24 He also points 
out that these groups spend a great deal of time explaining how they are different from 
other open source advocacy groups, even though they are quite similar and overlap in 
their membership. By defining themselves as the “first” remix video community, particu -
larly as the first female remix video community, vidders are able to legitimize themselves 
as the most authentic, and therefore best type, of video remix in the face of newer, male-
dominated ones.
With the rise of other forms of remix on YouTube in the beginning of the twenty-first 
century, vidding practices that had existed since 1975 found themselves in danger of 
“being written out of the history of remix,” according to Francesca Coppa in her pres -
entation at the DIY Video Summit in 2008.25 She continued: “[The popular conception 
is] that guys have been remixing mass media since 1994, or 1991 if you’re talking about 
machinima, so we really want to say, no, women have been remixing mass media since 
1975.”26 This history of vidding is explicitly gendered. It is extremely important to the 
identity of this community to identify their origins as older than the other forms of 
remix, and specifically to point out that this is a women’s  practice.
As Gwyn explains:
We [women] don’t get to see the stories we want to see. Most TV and certainly 
movies are done for a male audience, eighteen to thirty-four  . . . and they are 
not making the entertainments we necessarily want to see. We see all these 
other texts inside these things. So we have to take what is given to us and 
instead show the world how we see it; I’m going to make what I want to see.
Vidders resisted making broad generalizations about “women’s vidding” and “men’s vid -
ding” and were quick to explain that vidding doesn’t mean that the participants are only 
interested in romance. Gwyn herself pointed out that she likes making violent, action 
vids. But the emphasis on characters and relationships in vids, prominent vidder Laura 
Shapiro explained to me at VividCon, “are values associated with femaleness.” In inter -
views, vidders commonly described their practices as a method of writing back, or 
against, the televisual source material as a way to critique or rewrite the text against the 
intentions of the (male) creators and writers. An increase in the number of male partici -
pants in the community has also led to fears that the women’s space of fan-vidding 
conventions and LiveJournal circles may be changing.
Conclusion
There have been several calls out to the community to encourage more inclusivity in 
defining the anatomy of a vid, and characteristics of a vidder. In response to a conven -
tion panel entitled What Do We Want From Vids Now?  one vidder wrote:
The discussion had such a subtext of anxiety at certain points, a sense that we 
were in danger of losing something or losing control of something as vids 
become less an orphan art and expand out to meet a world of new media that 
is also rushing in to meet us. At least two people said, and said sincerely, that 
they were “not interested in policing the boundary between what is and isn’t a 
293
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . vid,” but I felt that there was a lot of repressed desire in the room to do so  . . . I 
really wanted to ask: What is it we are anxious about?  . . . Because change is 
coming to us whether or not we go out to meet it.
So what is it that vids that push the envelope make us fear? Loss of definition 
as an artform, as a community, when we can no longer clearly say what is a vid 
and what isn’t? Invasion by hostile forces that don’t understand (boys!) or that 
simply outnumber us, so that we get swamped and lost, when the boundaries 
between fanvidder and other new media artist blur?27
Most of the comments on this post were supportive of other new media forms of remix, 
but simultaneously protective of their particular community as a female-dominated and 
critical response to media texts. Or, as Australian vidder Boppy put it, “The LiveJournal—
slash—female-dominated vidding community does not have a monopoly on vidding and 
the sooner they realize that the better.”
Vidders are now more visible as they communicate online, and media participation 
through remix and editing has become a much more common practice. The appropria -
tive elements of fan culture have spread with the development and dissemination of 
interactive, Web 2.0 technologies and platforms.28 The community has also moved more 
into the open, and begun sharing vids using more public platforms such as YouTube, 
Tumblr, and Vimeo. These new spaces bring them into more and more contact with new 
types of vids. Despite many efforts to preserve traditional vidding styles, the genre 
changes every day and many contemporary vids would be unrecognizable to the early 
VCR vidders.
While vidding is a comparatively small fan practice, this study of amateur video pro -
ducers has provided historical and cultural context of a community engaged in practices 
that are currently at the forefront of public attention in light of recent copyright battles 
between governments, media industries, users, and Web 2.0 service providers.
Vidders provide valuable insight into the historical origins of remix culture, and dem -
onstrate that there has not been a paradigm shift in the role of the audience with the 
advent of digital media and participatory culture. Rather, new media formats, such as 
the remix video, did not arise unbidden, but represent the long-standing desire for audi -
ences to participate in and personalize their media.
Notes
 1 danah boyd, “Friends, Friendsters, and Top 8: Writing Community into Being on Social Network Sites,” 
First Monday  11, no. 12 (2006).
 2 The event changed from a straightforward debate about these topics to a “fail” after the debate turned to 
argument, and often became personal attacks which left the community in turmoil.
 3 Kandy Fong and the origins of vidding in slash fandom will be discussed further below.
 4 Unless otherwise indicated, all quotations from vidders or other communities members are based on 
personal interviews with the author conducted during ethnographic fieldwork.
 5 David Bell, An Introduction to Cybercultures  (London: Routledge, 2001), 93.
 6 Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier  (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1993), 5.
 7 Kevin Robins, “Cyberspace and the World We Live In,” in The Cybercultures Reader , ed. David Bell and 
Barbara M. Kennedy (London: Routledge, 2000).
 8 Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976).
 9 Nancy K. Baym, Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community  (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2000), 2.
294
K. FREUND10 John Paul Marshall, Living on Cybermind: Categories, Communication, and Control , vol. 24, New Literacies 
and Digital Epistemologies (New York: Peter Lang, 2007), 214.
11 Marshall, Living on Cybermind , 275
12 This comment was collected anonymously during online ethnographic data collection.
13 USC School of Cinematic Arts, “Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa—‘24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit’” (University of Southern California, 2009).
14 Francesca Coppa, “Women, Star Trek , and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding,” Transformative 
Works and Cultures  1 (2008): para. 3.3.
15 Francesca Coppa, “Celebrating Kandy Fong: Founder of the Fannish Music Video,” in In Media Res , 2007, 
http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2007/11/19/celebrating-kandy-fong-founder-of-fannish-
music-video.
16 Henry Jenkins, Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture  (New York: Routledge, 1992).
17 Camille Bacon-Smith, Enterprising Women: Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth  
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992).
18 Jean Burgess and Joshua Green, YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture  (Cambridge, MA: Polity 
Press, 2009).
19 Heroes , created by Tim Kring. NBC, 2006–10.
20 Stargate: Atlantis , created by Robert C. Cooper and Brad Wright, Sci-Fi Channel, 2004–09.
21 Fanlore, Another Sunday , http://fanlore.org/wiki/Another_Sunday.
22 This individual preferred to remain anonymous.
23 David M. Berry, Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source  (London: Pluto Press, 2008).
24 Ibid., 167.
25 As a point of interest, Coppa is also a founding board member of the Organization for Transformative 
Works.
26 USC School of Cinematic Arts. “Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa—‘24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit.’” University of Southern California, 2009.
27 The location of this post has been kept anonymous to protect the identity of the poster.
28 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide  (New York: New York University 
Press, 2006).
Bibliography
Bacon-Smith, Camille. Enterprising Women: Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth . 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
Baym, Nancy K. Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2000.
Bell, David. An Introduction to Cybercultures . London: Routledge, 2001.
Berry, David M. Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source . London: Pluto Press, 2008.
boyd, danah. “Friends, Friendsters, and Top 8: Writing Community into Being on Social Network 
Sites.” First Monday 11, no. 12 (2006).
Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture . Cambridge, MA: 
Polity Press, 2009.
Coppa, Francesca. “Celebrating Kandy Fong: Founder of the Fannish Music Video.” In In Media Res , 
2007, http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2007/11/19/celebrating-kandy-fong-founder-
of-fannish-music-video (accessed August 10, 2014).
———. “Women, Star Trek , and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding.” Transformative Works 
and Cultures 1 (2008).
Fanlore. “Another Sunday.” http://fanlore.org/wiki/Another_Sunday (accessed May 1, 2014).
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture . New York: Routledge, 1992.
———. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York University Press, 
2006.
Marshall, John Paul. Living on Cybermind: Categories, Communication, and Control . Vol. 24,  
New Literacies and Digital Epistemologies. New York: Peter Lang, 2007.
295
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID  . . . Rheingold, Howard. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier . Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1993.
Robins, Kevin. “Cyberspace and the World We Live In.” In The Cybercultures Reader , edited by David 
Bell and Barbara M. Kennedy, 77–95. London: Routledge, 2000.
USC School of Cinematic Arts . “Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa—‘24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit.’” University of Southern California, 2009. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=aYdllH7jZxg (accessed August 8, 2014).
Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1976.
21
PEELING THE LAYERS  
OF THE ONION
Authorship in Mashup and Remix 
Cultures
John Logie
In this chapter I seek to illustrate the degree to which digital composition strategies—
and in particular remix and mashup—dramatically complicate the task of ascribing 
authorship, and throw into relief the degree to which inherently collaborative composi -
tions (like most recorded music and all films) defy ready mapping onto the “author/
work” model that typically serves as the default model for the creative process. The 
author/work model also is foundational in the development of most copyright laws and 
especially US copyright law, which is rooted in a clause in the US Constitution calling 
for “securing limited rights” for “authors” in their “writings.” All subsequent expansions 
of US copyright build upon this foundation, even though many contemporary compos -
ers of texts—whether written, musical, cinematic, and/or digital—bear little resem -
blance to the solitary author invoked in this clause.1
To underscore the complexities of digitally facilitated mashup and remix composition, 
my method will be a full accounting of the creative processes that culminate in a fairly 
straightforward “A vs. B” mashup of two popular songs (or “versus” mashup for short). The 
“versus” subgenre of mashup typically strips the vocals from one track and lays those vocals 
over the instrumental bed from a second track. The resulting composition initially seems 
a work of tripartite authorship, with the composers of song A and song B each retaining 
authorship for their parts of the mashup, and the mashup artist(s) claiming an overarching 
layer of authorship (or curatorship, at least) grounded in determining where and how parts 
of song A and B can be brought into conversation with one another. But a full reckoning 
of the creative processes involved in the construction of a “versus” mashup—arguably the 
simplest type of mashup—brings us to a realization 
that theories of authorship grounded in solitary 
authors producing written compositions are not 
able to fully account for the networks of citation, 
quotation, and influence that lie at the heart of 
mashup, remix, and associated modes of digital 
composition.See Chapter 31  for Gustavo 
Romano’s first-person account 
of curating an exhibit in 
which the author/work model  
is challenged.
297
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONThe very term “authorship” carries with it a considerable amount of inertia. For most 
of the last half millennium, questions of authorship were perceived as straightforward. 
Those wishing to establish or clarify authorship needed merely to locate the acknowl -
edged composer of a given text (or cultural artifact), briefly consider whether that com -
poser was the prime (or, ideally, exclusive) mover in the construction of that text, and 
then double-check to ensure that the text was “original” enough to merit ascription to 
that composer. This approach has been especially pronounced from roughly the period 
of the Romantics up to and through the continental critique of authorship, anchored by 
Roland Barthes’s 1967 artistic manifesto in essay form, “The Death of the Author,”2 and 
Michel Foucault’s 1969 lecture “What Is an Author?”3 Taken together Barthes’s and 
Foucault’s challenges to authorship-as-usual served to emphasize the roles readers and 
cultures played in constructing both the text and the figure of the author. But, as the title 
(and core argument) of Seán Burke’s 1992 monograph, The Death and Return of the 
Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault and Derrida testifies, Barthes’s report 
of the author’s death proved à la T wain to be an exaggeration.4 Even as Barthes and 
Foucault critiqued the phenomenon of authorship, their alternative models involved 
similarly weighted figures (Barthes’s “reader” and Foucault’s “author-function”).
The advent of digital composition productively complicated questions of authorship. 
Even before the widespread adoption of Internet technologies, George Landow (among 
other scholars) noted “how complex decisions about authorship can be in a hypertext 
environment.”5 Landow’s argument was grounded in a sense that even nonnetworked 
hypertext writing environments were already offering a substantial realization of less 
author-centered composing models suggested by continental critique of authorship. 
Indeed, this quote is drawn from a 1991 monograph titled: Hypertext: The Convergence 
of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology : “Even though print technology is not 
entirely or even largely responsible for current attitudes in the humanities toward 
authorship and collaboration, a shift to hypertext systems would change them by empha -
sizing elements of collaboration.6
Landow was rightly underscoring the degree to which digital media could facilitate 
collaborative composing strategies that were difficult, if not impossible, in analog com -
posing spaces. But Landow’s heavy orientation toward the digital as the key facilitator 
of these nontraditional modes of composition was grounded in an apparent lack of 
awareness of the full range of composing strategies already apparent in analog media at 
the time of his writing. Consider Landow’s 1991 discussion of “analogue recording”:
Whereas analogue recording of sound and visual information requires serial, 
linear processing, digital technology removes the need for sequence by permit -
ting one to go directly to a particular bit of information. Thus if one wishes to 
find a particular passage in a Bach sonata on a tape cassette, one must scan 
through the cassette sequentially, though modern tape decks permit one to 
speed the process by skipping from space to space between sections of music. In 
contrast, if one wishes to locate a passage in digitally recorded music, one can 
instantly travel to that passage, note it for future reference, and manipulate it 
in ways impossible with analogue technologies—for example, one can instantly 
replay passages without having to scroll back through them.7
What Landow does not acknowledge here is that—at the time of his writing—an entire 
genre of music had, for over a decade, been building compositions through the alinear  
298
J. LOGIEprocessing of analog information. I am, of course, referring specifically to the first wave 
of rap and hip hop, and in particular the DJ-centered compositions built around scratch -
ing, punch phrasing, breaks, and other remix strategies that can be traced to street par -
ties in the boroughs of New York City in the late 1970s.
Indeed, the creative practices of hip hop DJs largely anticipate the cut-and-paste 
aesthetics of contemporary digital culture. The goals of “prevent[ing], block[ing], and 
bypass[ing] linearity and binarity” had certainly been achieved by even early DJs armed 
with little more than turntables, rudimentary mixers, and well-curated stacks of vinyl 
records. Compositions like “The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of 
Steel”—which was released in 1981—showcase aesthetic strategies centered on the 
selective disassembly and reassembly of songs. These strategies, when paired with afford -
able sampling tools, prompted an explosion of compositional creativity with arguably 
high water marks in the production work of Hank Shocklee and The Bomb Squad on 
the first three Public Enemy records (1987–90); and The Dust Brothers’ and Beastie 
Boys’ production work on the 1989 album Paul’s Boutique .8
But the success (and attendant public awareness) of these works also prompted a shift 
in the interpretation of United States copyright laws that made similarly sample-rich 
productions functionally impossible, at least as commercial products. The breaking 
point was the Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy’s December 17, 1991 decision in Grand 
Upright vs. Warner  in which rapper Biz Markie’s parodic treatment of Gilbert 
O’Sullivan’s “Alone Again (Naturally)” was found so egregiously in violation of copy -
right as to expose both Biz Markie and his label to potential criminal liability.9 In this 
case, Judge Duffy largely confined his investigation to the question of whether 
O’Sullivan had properly transferred copyright to Grand Upright Music Ltd. Duffy’s 
opinion makes abundantly clear that he understands O’Sullivan’s authorship rights—
though transferred to Grand Upright—as absolute . Duffy’s opinion infamously opens 
with “Thou Shalt Not Steal,” carefully footnoted to the Book of Exodus. Duffy describes 
Gilbert O’Sullivan as “the acknowledged writer of the composition ‘Alone Again 
(Naturally)’ and the performer who is featured on the master recording pirated by the 
defendants” thereby establishing that—for Duffy—the only question on the table in 
the Grand Upright  decision is whether the transfer of rights from O’Sullivan to Grand 
Upright is verifiable (it was). Warner Brothers, arguing on behalf of Biz Markie, chose 
to focus on this ownership question instead of focusing on Biz Markie’s likely right to 
compose a parody and his possible fair use right to build a composition around a brief 
sample from a previous song, if the new work was substantially transformative  in nature. 
The Grand Upright decision ushered in the era of “clearance” in which—at least as far 
as major labels were concerned—all samples incorporated into new compositions had 
to be either expressly permitted or licensed by copyright holders. For productions like 
Paul’s Boutique  in which a typical song was constructed by a dozen or more samples that 
were woven together in a dynamic creative process, the Grand Upright decision was 
both an administrative and financial death knell. In its wake, copyright owners were 
free to charge whatever they thought the market would bear, or, more troublingly, 
simply refuse permission for derivative works altogether.
And so, for the most part, samples have gone underground. To the extent that a seg -
ment of a song—however brief—is processed in the wake of Grand Upright  as an 
“authored work,” all samples are subject to legal and administrative processes that can 
be expensive, time-consuming, and arbitrary. And yet, because of the ever-broadening 
299
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONreach of digital tools, more and more composers are exploring the possibilities of remix 
and mashup composing strategies. Most commonly they do so on the fringes of main -
stream commercial culture, and without participating in the conventional revenue 
structures for musical compositions. Indeed, the legacy of the Grand Upright  decision is 
occasional licensing fees drawn from the most deep-pocketed composers and labels. It 
should be noted, though, that while the clause in the US Constitution that serves as the 
basis for US copyright law suggests that copyright will “ promote the progress of useful arts ” 
by securing limited monopoly rights for “authors,” the Grand Upright case is typical in 
that the litigant is not the “author,” but the entity that purchased the rights from the 
author.10
While the mashup composing strategies of DJs like Greg Gillis (better known as Girl 
Talk)—in which dozens and dozens of samples are tweaked, transformed, and interwo -
ven—tend to dominate public perceptions of mashup as a genre, this essay will focus on 
a superficially simpler mashup titled simply “No Fun/Push It,” released in 2002 and 
attributed to “2 Many DJs.” While the records of how all of the contributing works 
ultimately participating in this mashup were composed are imperfect and patched 
together (from sometimes contrasting accounts) my hope is that by taking the time to 
“peel the onion” of this relatively simple mashup composition, we will not only under -
stand each layer more fully, we will arrive at its center with a newfound understanding 
of the significance of the mashup’s collective construction and its implications for 
understanding twenty-first century digital composing practices.
As its title suggests, this mashup consists of a roughly 50:50 blend of portions of The 
Stooges’ song “No Fun” with portions of Salt-n-Pepa’s song “Push It.” The mashup was 
first commercially available as part of a massive “suite” of interwoven mashups on 2 
Many DJs’ album As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2 . At first the track seems fairly 
straightforward. The aggressive vocals from Salt-n-Pepa are laid over the grinding 
instrumental bed from the Stooges’ track. The balance shifts slightly after a minute, 
with Iggy Pop’s vocal exhortations carefully interwoven with Salt-n-Pepa’s rap. That 
said, the mashup is largely The Stooges’ instruments overlaid with Salt-n-Pepa’s 
vocals.
Too often, academic discussions of music and jokes find ways to spoil the fun of the 
artifact under examination. I’m confident that this particular mashup will withstand my 
process of analysis in the following pages. This is in no small part due to the power of its 
constituent songs. The Stooges’ foundationally and emblematically proto-punk track 
composed in 1969 still has the capacity to roar out from speakers and rattle the listener, 
if played with sufficient volume. 1987’s “Push It” teeters on a knife’s edge between an 
aggressively feminist statement on one side, and engagingly forthright smut on the other. 
Each of these songs arguably deserves an article-length examination, but for the pur -
poses of this chapter, the focus will be limited to the specific modes of composition 
involved in the songs and the eventual mashup.
“No Fun” is the first track on The Stooges’ self-titled debut album. This song, like all 
of the others on the album, is credited to the four members of the band at that time: 
Dave Alexander, Ron Asheton, Scott Asheton, and Iggy Stooge (aka Iggy Pop, with 
both of these as pseudonyms for James Osterberg). The studio recordings on the album 
stabilized what—in live performance—were almost certainly highly variable presenta -
tions with improvised lyrics and relatively free-form musical passages. Iggy Pop describes 
the band’s composing process at the time in the following terms:
300
J. LOGIEStooges rehearsals never lasted too much more than 20 minutes. During them, I 
was writing, putting together the riffs and pieces of music so they would add up to 
songs, finishing words madly before we went to New York [to record the album]. 
We had four songs ready and we thought that was going to be our album. This was 
“1969,” “I Wanna Be Your Dog,” “No Fun” and “Anne.” Each of the songs was 
meant to have a 7 to 15 minute instrumental after the conclusion of the song 
format. The good news was the song parts were good and the improv was good up 
to about a minute. The bad news was that after that, we hadn’t put the homework 
into making an improv stand up as a listening experience.11
Sonic Youth guitarist Thurston Moore wrote of the original Stooges line-up: “Their 
music was total high-energy blues with the contemporary freakout of Jimi Hendrix and 
the free-jazz spirit of John Coltrane.”12 Notably, each of Moore’s points of comparison 
foregrounds improvisation as a creative strategy. So while it is tempting to begin and end 
the question of the authorship of “No Fun” with the four members of the band, it seems 
clear that those responsible for wrangling The Stooges in the studio bear some signifi -
cant responsibility for what listeners hear when they listen to the track as presented on 
The Stooges (Figure 21.1 ).
Figure 21.1  The Stooges record cover (photo courtesy of the author)
301
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONThe Stooges’ debut LP was produced by John Cale, who, in 1969, had just left the 
Velvet Underground. He was charged with the responsibility of helping to shape the 
record into a less improvisational and more traditionally verse-and-chorus presentation 
by Elektra Records label head Jac Holzman, who—according to Pop—said the record 
“didn’t have enough songs.” Holzman later intervened in the record directly, having 
rejected Cale’s initial mix. Holzman’s mixdown of the tracks is the one that was heard 
on the initial 1969 release of The Stooges .
So, in the case of the song “No Fun” we have—at minimum—six actively contribut -
ing creative people (the four Stooges, Cale, and Holzman) all of whom can reasonably 
claim significant and direct influence over the final sound of the record. While both 
convention and common sense invite us to place Iggy Pop (as lyricist as well as singer) 
and The Stooges in the primary position of composers, it is also reasonable to observe 
that the song might have neither its final shape nor its final sound without the interven -
tions of Cale and Holzman.
The question of accountability for the specifics of Salt-n-Pepa’s 1987 “Push It” 
single is substantially more complicated than that of “No Fun.” On the most recent 
pressings of Salt-n-Pepa’s debut album, the songwriting credit for “Push It” is split 
between Hurby “Luv Bug” Azor, primarily known as Salt-n-Pepa’s producer, and 
Raymond Douglas Davies, better known as Ray Davies, the principal songwriter for 
the legendary British band The Kinks. Azor is generally recognized as the principal 
lyricist for the song, though some accounts of the song’s construction suggest that the 
vocalists improvised (or “freestyled”) throughout the recording. It is also likely that 
Azor was the person who made most of the production decisions on “Push It,” as this 
account illustrates:
James and Azor recorded [“Push It”] in a bathroom, in the house of his friend 
Fresh Gordon. (They liked the echo the bathroom tiles made.) Azor had writ -
ten the lyrics, which were fairly mundane. Then Gordon had played a string 
line on his synthesizer—it was so corny he considered it a joke. But Azor, who 
has an ear for this sort of thing, cried “Play that!”13
The cover for the 12-inch single charmingly summarizes Azor’s role in “Push It” as 
follows: “Hyped up by HURB—the Supa Def Dope Produsa,” and indeed he appears 
to have been the prime mover in the construction and lyrical content of the song 
(Figure 21.2 ).
The split writing credit, then, is attributable to a passage in “Push It” wherein the 
vocalists rap “Boy, you really got me going/You got me so I don’t know what I’m 
doing.” These two lines flip the gender of lyrics from The Kinks’ 1964 hit “You 
Really Got Me” and the rhythm of the vocal delivery is rhythmically (but not melod -
ically) patterned after The Kinks’ song, but The Kinks’ familiar power guitar chords 
are nowhere in the mix. That Davies somehow received this split credit for a brief, 
adulterated lyric quotation, testifies to the expansiveness of current interpretations 
of copyright laws. Indeed, Davies was neither present in this creative process nor 
aware of his now-credited contribution until after the record’s release. Nevertheless, 
he is recognized under US law as a co-composer of “Push It” because of a lyrical 
borrowing that may have been a spur-of-the-moment improvisation as the track was 
recorded. But this is by no means the only borrowed element within the Salt-n-Pepa 
track.
302
J. LOGIEInterestingly, the initial pressings of “Push It” actually feature no songwriting credit 
at all (Figure 21.3 ). This is perhaps due to the track’s significant reliance on the 
distinctive “Ahhhh  . . . Push It!” intonation that is clearly modeled after a similar 
vocal turn from a deeply obscure track titled “Keep on Pushin’ by the 1970s St. Louis 
funk and soul band Coalkitchen (and distinct from the similarly named track by The 
Figure 21.2  “Push It” record cover (photo courtesy of the author)
303
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONImpressions). The “corny” synthesizer line that became the hook for the Salt-n-Pepa 
track also sounds like a simplified version of the groove from the Coalkitchen track. 
The 45 rpm single of “Keep on Pushin’ lists lead singer Pauli Carman, keyboard 
player/producer/engineer Michael Day, and guitarist/vocalist Rob Newhouse as the 
songwriters for the track. In addition to the Coalkitchen borrowings, Salt-n-Pepa’s 
vocal incorporates the distinctive call to “Pick up on this!” from James Brown’s 
“Greedy Man” (cocredited to Brown and Charles Bobbitt, Brown’s longtime road 
manager); an “Ow! There it is!” from James Brown’s “There It Is” (credited to Brown 
and saxophonist St. Clair Pinckney) and a lengthy invitation for “Just the sexy 
people” to start dancing, modeled after a section of The Time’s “The Bird,” a song 
formally credited to Jamie Starr (a pseudonym for Prince), Time lead singer Morris 
Day, and Time guitarist Jesse Johnson.
All of this said, lyrically there isn’t much to “Push It.” Like The Kinks’ “You Really 
Got Me” before it, “Push It” succeeds due to the combination of the emotive force and 
attitude of the singers’ delivery and the power of the song’s instrumental hooks.
Interestingly, the core beats in the hit version of the song are not attributable to 
Azor, but to the remixing skills of San Francisco DJ and producer, Cameron Paul, who 
heard the original version of “Push It” in the context of his work as a club DJ and went 
to work:
Figure 21.3  Salt-n-Pepa record (photo courtesy of the author)
304
J. LOGIEI brought it into my studio and I started playing around with it  . . . I started playing  
with my keyboards and I  . . . I just wanted to do a remix for my remix record label 
(Nikfit). And I started playing around with the bassline  . . . and then I started 
playing around with a melody line on another keyboard on my Emax I think it 
was, and some sampling  . . . you know stuff like that. And I just  . . . I did it, I 
overlaid all these tracks and mixed it down  . . . and I did a radio edit for 
KMU  . . . So they added that version to their playlist and the record label is going 
“What is going on?” They didn’t even know “Push It” existed practically, the 
record label and now all of a sudden they’re hearing all of this stuff from the Bay 
Area about “Push It” and so the program director told them they were playing my 
remix, so they contacted me, the record label contacted me and they asked if they 
could buy my remix and I said “yes” and they released it on 12-inch on the album, 
and that was the version that they did the video to, and, y’know, that’s what hap -
pened. It ended up going platinum. I got a platinum record out of it.14
So, in multiple ways, “Push It” is a work of distributed  collaborative composition, with 
many of the co-composers (Davies and Paul in particular) being both geographically and 
personally distant from Azor, Fresh Gordon, Salt, and Pepa when they recorded the 
vocal and keyboard elements of the song.
Nevertheless, US copyright law effectively encourages us to seek out composers whose 
contributions can be roughly mapped onto the author/work model. And in the case of 
“Push It,” there are at least 14 co-composers who contributed at least as much as (and in 
several cases much , much more than) credited “cowriter” Ray Davies: Azor and Gordon; 
the three Coalkitchen cowriters; James Brown and his cowriters (Charles Bobbitt, and St. 
Clair Pinkney); The Time’s team of Starr, Day, and Johnson; DJ Cameron Paul, and, of 
course, Salt and Pepa (neither of the two women who have been known professionally as 
DJ Spinderella contributed to the composition). In the counts included above, we are 
limiting the scope of participation to lyricists, vocalists, credited composer/musicians, pro -
ducers, mixers, and remixers. For “No Fun” and “Push It” combined, the available records 
point to at least 21 hands-on participants, triple the number of group members (seven: the 
four Stooges, Salt, Pepa, and the second DJ Spinderella) on the record covers for the 
albums housing the two songs. Notable in the descriptions of the creative processes of both 
songs is a general acknowledgment that improvisation and spur-of-the-moment decisions 
played a large part in the eventual shape of each track’s sound. And in the case of “Push 
It” the network of contributors and sites of production stretches from: IBC Studios in 
London in 1964; through Nashville, Tennessee in 1971 (the site of Starday-King Studios 
used by James Brown); to “Sunday Studios” (likely in the US Midwest where Coalkitchen 
recorded); up to First Avenue in downtown Minneapolis, Minnesota (where The Time 
recorded a live version of “The Bird”); to Fresh Gordon’s house in Brooklyn, New York 
City; and finally to Cameron Paul’s San Francisco studio in 1987.
The 2002 2 Many DJs’ mashup of “No Fun” and “Push It” finds Stephen and David 
Dewaele in their studio in Ghent, Belgium selectively blending the by-products of the 
“Push It” and “No Fun” networks with one another, bringing the aggregated total of 
identifiable composers for their mashup to 23, and resulting in a musical composition 
that has—if all of its compositional elements and sites of production are taken into 
account—literally crossed the Atlantic twice .
The effect of the “No Fun/Push It” mashup depends entirely on the listener’s familiarity 
with both songs and, to a degree, with the cultural contexts that produced both songs. 
305
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONWithout putting too fine a point on it, the disaffected Dionysian stance that Iggy mani -
fested in 1969 was a clear response to the apparent broken promises of the Summer of 
Love. Salt-n-Pepa were pioneers in rap, being the first all-female group to have chart suc -
cess (in 1987) in what was an almost exclusively male-dominated genre. The two acts 
come from distinct cultural moments and distinct subcultures, and neither group was ini -
tially welcome on mainstream commercial radio. But despite the deck being stacked 
against this occurrence, each act found its way to a substantial number of listeners’ ears.
The Dewaele Brothers’ composition leverages their intended audiences’ familiarity 
with both songs. Indeed, the mashup’s effect hinges on the implicit challenge that the 
Dewaele Brothers have accepted. Because the default perception of The Stooges and 
Salt-n-Pepa at the time was that they hailed from fairly polarized spaced on the spectrum 
of musical possibilities, the mashup is and should be understood as—among other 
things—a political statement. The Dewaele Brothers’ composition invites listeners to 
understand The Stooges and Salt-n-Pepa in terms of one another. Indeed, the Dewaele 
Brothers’ near-seamless integration of the two songs calls into question the then-com -
monplace compartmentalization of the songs according to race, gender, genre, or some 
combination of all three.
Nevertheless, in a 2011 interview, Stephen Dewaele downplays this aspect of the 
composition:
Interviewer:   Your popularity went through the roof after your mixtape As Heard on 
Radio Soulwax Pt. 2 . It mashed up things that nobody had thought of 
putting together before, from Salt ‘N’ Pepa’s “Push It” to Stooges’ “No 
Fun,” and Destiny’s Child’s “Independent Woman” over 10cc’s “Dreadlock 
Holiday” to Dolly Parton’s “Nine to Five.” Are you proud of that?
Dewaele:   I don’t look at it like that. I’m not proud that we managed to bring 
together such different styles. That’s not what we’re about. We like the 
attitude of the music most of all. I think in our heads there’s no 
difference between a really old Chicago house track and hardcore 
punk—they have the same fuck you in the music. That’s the reason 
why we’ll mash something.15
But this account of the team’s process is at odds with some of the choices the team has 
made elsewhere. There really is precious little (if any) “fuck you” to be had in 10cc’s 
sappy “Dreadlock Holiday” so there was clearly some other reason for the team mashing 
it with Destiny’s Child.
Neil Strauss’s 2002 New York Times  article, which introduced mashups to the Times ’ 
readership, found David Dewaele articulating a different rationale:
From the opening track of their album, there is a distinct style and aesthetic at 
work. Often, the songs are cut up by computer, so that an introduction can be 
shortened, a verse removed or a section repeated to maintain the set’s fast pace. 
“It has to be something that has some sort of edge to it, something weird that 
makes you go, ‘What is this!’” said David Dewaele.16
Whatever their ultimate motivation, the Dewaele Brothers’ expert blending of “No 
Fun” and “Push It” results in an artifact that does not (and indeed cannot ) travel through 
culture with the traditional trappings of authorship. For starters, the Dewaele Brothers’ 
306
J. LOGIEaggregation of pseudonyms speaks to their refusal to fully occupy the position of “author” 
with respect to their mashup compositions. While initially known professionally as The 
Fucking Dewaele Brothers (or Flying Dewaele Brothers for politer company) the 
Dewaele name is nowhere to be found on the CD containing this mashup ( Figure 21.4 ). 
Rather, it is credited to 2 Many DJs and, confusingly, titled As Heard on Radio Soulwax 
Pt. 2  with the Dewaeles’ names never listed.
The mashups on As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2  are unusual for the mashup genre, 
in that they were painstakingly licensed and cleared:
It’s been almost three years in the making. It took one record company employee 
more than six months of hard labour, 865 e-mails, 160 faxes and hundreds of 
phone calls to contact over 45 major and independent record companies, a total 
amount of 187 different tracks were involved from which 114 got approved, 62 
refused and 11 were un-trackable. It caused massive headaches and sweaty 
palms to employees of “clearance centers” and record companies all over the 
world. But it’s finally here. It’s about 62 minutes long and there’s 45 (or is that 
46?) tracks on it. It took seven long days and nights to cut, edit, mix and re-edit 
it all together and it fucking rocks!17
Figure 21.4  2 Many DJ’s album cover (photo courtesy of the author)
307
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONIONBecause of this painstaking process, As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2  was legally released 
in Europe, but not in the United States, where permissions issues proved intractable. 
Indeed, in the wake of the Grand Upright  decision, the Dewaele Brothers were arguably 
wise to conceal their roles as composers of the album, to create at least a mild roadblock 
for United States-based litigants pursuing copyright claims. As with many other mashup 
compositions, the Dewaele Brothers’ work cannot circulate commercially in the United 
States. Were they to attempt to sell their album—wherein the “No Fun/Push It” mashup 
is only one of 45 songs, each of which likely has its own set of 21 (or so) composers with 
a potential copyright claim, the Dewaele Brothers would be potentially exposing them -
selves to a continuing series of micro-reenactments of the interminable Jarndyce case at 
the heart of Charles Dickens’s Bleak House .18
Even the most basic mashup speaks to the complexities of composition in networked 
digital spaces. Whether authorized or not, twenty-first century networked digital com -
posers have levels of access to extant works that greatly exceed those of all previous 
generations combined, with copyright laws being the only significant barrier to the use 
and appropriation of these works. Further, digital tools readily facilitate the disassembly 
and reassembly of these works. Contemporary composers and curators also have substan -
tial opportunities to consider extant works in part  as well as in toto . Opportunities to 
isolate sections of a given text, artifact, or composition—whether present in the original 
presentation or not—offer contemporary composers a wide array of opportunities to 
reexamine, reconsider, and recontextualize those works.
Contemporary musical compositions routinely arrive as the by-products of complex 
networks of distributed authorship. While practices of remix, mashup, and recomposi -
tion have gained increasing traction in popular culture (examples include the so-called 
“mashups” performed on the TV program Glee, and Anna Kendrick’s portrayal of a 
remix/mashup DJ in the film Pitch Perfect ) the same studios that circulate these (licensed) 
mashups are exercising profound influence over how and whether others might play 
with their “intellectual property.” Over the past two decades, the Recording Industry 
Association of America (RIAA) and the Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA) have relentlessly lobbied the United States Congress to pass laws (many of 
them overly drawn) that reinscribe the notion of the author as owner  of a given work. 
This makes business sense. These industries depend upon the opportunity to cleanly and 
efficiently purchase copyrights from composers. But as a practical matter, these organiza -
tions represent the companies whose core artifacts—recorded music and motion pic -
tures—are among the least amenable to being understood as the products of anything 
resembling the traditional author/work composing model. They are, rather, the by-prod -
ucts of layered collaboration. Indeed, as the above-cited examples illustrate, it takes 
many hands to compose and produce even a stripped down punk anthem. It takes many  
more to produce a representative hip hop track. And when these kinds of tracks become 
participants in larger remix projects, the process of sorting out authorship and ownership 
becomes maddeningly complex.
Mashup and remix compositions are grounded in a notion of play with respect to the 
concept of authorship. These compositions celebrate curation, connection, collabora -
tion, and critique (whether conscious or not). As such, they are at odds with US copy -
right law’s foundational organization around an author/work model that has been the 
subject of continuous theoretical challenges since at least Barthes’s 1967 essay positing 
“The Death of the Author.” But the Barthesian move of supplanting the author with the 
reader is inadequate to the task of understanding the dynamic layers of collaboration, 
308
J. LOGIEconnection, curation, and criticism that produce compositions like the “No Fun/Push 
It” mashup. Indeed, mashups like these make evident the degree to which authorship 
and ownership have been intermingled both conceptually and in laws addressing crea -
tivity. There is clearly too little cultural space for those who wish to occupy the role of 
composer/curator/critic—and not (at least primarily) “originator.”
Foucault’s closing suggestion that we might rediscover a time when texts could circu -
late “in the anonymity of a murmur”19 pulls us closer to the practical reality of contem -
porary mashup cultures in which authorship is often both convoluted and suppressed. 
The first of these qualities is due to the very nature of the composing tasks involved. The 
second, by contrast, is likely a response to current law. In the absence of a copyright 
regime that requires authors not only for the purposes of streamlined sales of composi -
tions, but also for purposes of legal accountability, most mashup composers have opted 
out of both composition and credit, allowing pseudonyms to stand in for their names. 
Mashup composers are, in our current legal landscape, often strategically anonymous , but 
we can easily envision revisions to laws addressing creativity that would open up spaces 
for the overtly dependent creativity of mashup and remix artists. The problem is ulti -
mately not one of credit so much as it is one of compensation. And those questions are, 
by contrast, maddeningly complex, and further complicated by existing infrastructures 
for the purchase and compensation of creative work that have—at best—a mixed record 
with respect to adequately rewarding composers for their work.
While scholars and theorists have been building toward nuanced understandings of 
these complex modes of composition for decades, when US law is presented with a work 
like the “No Fun/Push It” mashup, its response is to ask first, “Who wrote this?” and 
then, failing that, to ask, “Who are the composers who most resemble authors?” This 
search for authorship is—in effect—an attempt to assign legal ownership as expedi -
tiously as possible. This is needed for commerce even when it is not needed by the 
composers or the cultures they are addressing. And because any of the many  
legal “authors” who contributed to a mashup (or their heirs, or the purchasers of their 
copyrights) might be ceded not only credit and compensation, but also control  over the 
circulation of the mashup (including, potentially, the right to suppress it altogether) cur -
rent United States law actively discourages mashup and remix modes of composition.
And that, among other things, is no fun .
Notes
 1 U.S. Copyright Office “Copyright Law: Preface.” Copyright Law of the United States of America , http://
www.copyright.gov/title17/92preface.html.
 2 Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author.” Aspen  5/6, art. 3 (1967), http://www.ubu.com/aspen/aspen -
5and6/threeEssays.html#barthes.
 3 Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?” In Language, Counter-Memory, Practice , ed. Donald F . Bouchard 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 124–127.
 4 Séan Burke, The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault and Derrida  
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1992).
 5 George P . Landow, Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology  (Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), 98.
 6 Ibid., 94.
 7 Ibid., 21.
 8 Paul’s Boutique , Beastie Boys album, published July 25, 1989 by Capital Records.
 9 Grand Upright v. Warner , 780 F . Supp. 182 (SDNY 1991).
10 U.S. Copyright Office “Copyright Law: Preface.”
309
PEELING THE LAYERS OF THE ONION11 Jaan Uhelszki, “Iggy Pop—Album By Album.” Uncut , http://www.uncut.co.uk/iggy-pop/iggy-pop-album-
by-album-feature#wDVKDfEwtoUf7t58.99.
12 Thurston Moore, “100 Greatest Artists: 78, The Stooges,” RollingStone.com , http://www.rollingstone.com/
music/lists/100-greatest-artists-of-all-time-19691231/the-stooges-20110420.
13 Dinitia Smith, “Straight Outta Queens: How Salt-N-Pepa Turned Rap on Its Head,” New York , January 
17, 1994. Google Books.
14 Jarrell Mason, “Cameron Paul Interview— Part 2 ,” YouTube, May 27, 2007, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=C0a00PXuZ3A.
15 “‘All We Are Doing Is Playing Other People’s Records’: 2 Many DJs Interview,” Skiddle.com , December 
20, 2011, http://www.skiddle.com/news/all/All-we-are-doing-is-playing-other-peoples-records-2manyDJs-
Interview/11042/.
16 Neil Strauss, “Spreading by the Web, Pop’s Bootleg Remix,” The New York Times , May 9, 2002, http://
www.nytimes.com/2002/05/09/business/spreading-by-the-web-pop-s-bootleg-remix.html?pagewanted 
=all&src=pm.
17 Kevinen Joyce, “ As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt 2 ,” kevinenjoyce.com , September 13, 2013, http://www.
kevinenjoyce.com/soulwax/disco.php?idgr=47Gr2ac961017.
18 The characters in Bleak House  anxiously await the resolution of an estate case involving multiple conflict -
ing wills. As the novel concludes, the entire estate has been consumed by legal fees. The novel is thought 
to be—at least in part—a roman à clef, based on Dickens’ own experiences as a litigant attempting to 
pursue enforcement of his copyrights.
19 Foucault, “What Is an Author?” 127.
Bibliography
‘All We Are Doing Is Playing Other People’s Records’: 2 Many DJs Interview.” Skiddle.com , December 
20, 2011. http://www.skiddle.com/news/all/All-we-are-doing-is-playing-other-peoples-records-
2manyDJs-Interview/11042/ (accessed August 11, 2014).
Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” Aspen  5/6, art. 3 1967. http://www.ubu.com/aspen/
aspen5and6/threeEssays.html#barthes (accessed August 11, 2014).
Burke, Seán. The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in Barthes, Foucault and 
Derrida . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1992.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” In Language, Counter-Memory, Practice , edited by Donald F . 
Bouchard, 124–127. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977.
Grand Upright v. Warner , 780 F . Supp. 182 (SDNY 1991).
Joyce, Kevinen. “As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt 2.” kevinenjoyce.com, http://www.kevinenjoyce.com/
soulwax/disco.php?idgr=47Gr2ac961017 (accessed August 11, 2014).
Landow, George P . Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology . 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992, 98.
Mason, Jarrell. “Cameron Paul Interview— Part 2 .” YouTube, May 27, 2007. YouTube video. http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0a00PXuZ3A (accessed August 11, 2014).
Moore, Thurston. “100 Greatest Artists: 78, The Stooges.” RollingStone.com . http://www.rollingstone.
com/music/lists/100-greatest-artists-of-all-time-19691231/the-stooges-20110420 (accessed 
November 5, 2013).
Smith, Dinitia. “Straight Outta Queens: How Salt-N-Pepa Turned Rap on Its Head.” New York , January 
17, 1994. http://books.google.com/books?id=xbcBAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA32&dq=Straight+Outta+Q
ueens:+How+Salt-N-Pepa+Turned+Rap+on+Its+Head.%E2%80%9D&hl=en&sa=X&ei=QgtOU9
XXA7DfsASHlYBI&ved=0CC0Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false (accessed August 11, 2014).
Strauss, Neil. “Spreading by the Web, Pop’s Bootleg Remix.” The New York Times , May 9, 2002. http://
www.nytimes.com/2002/05/09/business/spreading-by-the-web-pop-s-bootleg-remix.html? pagewanted 
=all&src=pm (accessed August 11, 2014).
Uhelszki, Jaan. “Iggy Pop—Album By Album.” Uncut . May, 2013. http://www.uncut.co.uk/iggy-pop/
iggy-pop-album-by-album-feature#wDVKDfEwtoUf7t58.99 (accessed S).
U.S. Copyright Office. “Copyright Law: Preface.” Copyright Law of the United States of America . http://
www.copyright.gov/title17/92preface.html (accessed August 11, 2014).
22
REMIXTHECONTEXT  
(A THEORETICAL 
FICTION)
Mark Amerika
At the Café Merz, an assemblage of software copyleftists, ostracized academics, para-
professional adjunct curators, #NewAesthetic glitch artists, media archaeologists, digital 
humanities grad students, creative commoners, and Facebook flâneurs  are congregating 
at a long table drinking cups of fresh Bella Aurora Nicaraguan coffee roasted by the pros 
over at Coava Coffee Roasters where sourcing single origin coffee is definitely part of 
the eco-ethical mix  . . . 
—What are you working on? (asks Saul, a colleague from the English department).
—I’m writing an essay for a new collection of academic essays on remix culture.
—Really? Are remix and academia even compatible terms in the same sentence?
—Sure, how do you think I got promoted to full?
—By being a remix artist?
—Sort of. Maybe it’s because I figured out how to mashup my creative skills as a pro -
fessor of remixology with my practical skills as a context provider. I mean, how many 
times can you remix the same thing over and over again while staying true to Ezra 
Pound’s dictum to always “make it new”? My strategy has always been to remix the con -
text, right? Remixing the context is remixing me, Mark Amerika, as a kind of thoughto -
graphical  font that I transmit through different media formats. Different scenes of 
writing.
—For example?
—Well, there was this one cool online journal that wanted an essay from me on 
remix, appropriation, copyright/copyleft, and literary cut-ups.
—Peer-reviewed?
—Absolutely, but that’s not why I did it. I don’t care about the brownie points.
—Really?
—Yeah, because if you focus on the brownie points then you have always already sold 
out to an outmoded reward system that tends to mostly benefit the academic publishing 
mafia that exploits the networked intelligentsia by transferring their well-wrought intel -
lectual labor into the publisher’s own intellectual property.
—What do you mean?
—I mean you spend months researching and writing your essays and, if you’re “lucky” 
enough to get it accepted for publication with a reputable academic press, then most of 
311
REMIXTHECONTEXT (A THEORETICAL FICTION)them will send you contracts that are clearly situating you, the artist, the scholarly 
writer, the applied remixologist—whatever role you take on—as a kind of work-for-hire 
knowledge worker-drone.
—You mean they take your copyright?
—Pretty much that’s the case a lot of the time now. But they act like they’re seriously 
doing you a favor—and they even promise you one whole copy of the book or journal 
your work will appear in. Plus, if you treat them nicely, they’ll let you publish that piece 
you wrote—but that they now own—in your own collection.
—But you’re, like, Professor Remix, right? Your blog is even titled Professor VJ ! You 
are always taking source material and manipulating it into an experiential and contex -
tual field of différance . And you tend to distribute it for free over the Internet, no? This 
giving away of your copyright to the academic publishing mafia goes against everything 
your practice-based research is focused on.
—Of course, and this is what I was getting at. Not only do I usually distribute it for 
free over the Net, “it” is always a remix of prior works—both mine and other things that 
I happen to be sampling from at any given moment in time. It’s kind of how my brain 
works. Vannevar Bush, the physicist who founded the MIT Media Lab, wrote an essay 
in 1945 called “As We May Think,” where he makes the case that we all think associa -
tively and that our practice-based research is all about thinking as linking. He writes 
about the need to invent technology that makes this linking easier and suggests that 
once that source material—he calls it data—becomes more available through advanced 
networked and mobile media communication systems, we will create a networked intel -
ligentsia capable of manipulating all of this data for our own research purposes without 
the need for profiteering middlemen. Of course, today we just think of that remixologi -
cal thought process as a kind of hypertextual consciousness. Welcome to the World 
Wide Web.
—So, really, what you’re saying is that most contemporary thinking is being transmitted  
via a larger networked intelligentsia that is constantly remixing different iterations of 
contemporary thought. Maybe it’s something like cite-specific versioning.
—Yes, and if Ted Nelson, the computer scientist who invented the term and ideas 
behind hypertext  had had his way, we would also be able to virtually republish bits and 
pieces of writing from all around the Web however we choose to collage them into our 
own version. He saw us doing this the same way we can virtually republish a GIF or 
JPEG by plugging its image source location into the HTML code. So, yes, it’s a bit  
different given the networked media apparatus we have at our disposal right now, but 
basically you can create cite-specific versions of your own thinking by linking to the 
different work that you remix over time. Case in point: that essay-article I was referring 
to just a moment ago. I wrote it for Media-N: Journal for the New Media Caucus  and the 
opening scene of that story took place in a café very similar to the one we’re in right 
now.
—Cool. You call it a story. So if I understand your position on this, you see this larger 
networked intelligentsia as a kind of public domain narrative environment for the vari -
ous social media performance artists to remix their personae in, yes? The idea is to easily 
cut and paste one’s shifting new media presence into different scenes of writing, right? I 
get it. So for this Media-N story, what happened in that café?
—Well, it had a few of my students in it, talking about my remix culture course.
—I was in it. (One of the students that’s been listening to this dialog pipes up.)
—Yeah, Pink was in it. What were you talking about? Do you remember?
312
M. AMERIKA—Yeah, I was saying how in your course we have to write weekly blog assignments 
that respond to the readings but that also remixologically inhabit the styles, the voices, 
the structural rhythms, and the syntactical media agenda of the artists we bring into the 
mix, and that basically what we’re being graded on is how well we perform our roles as 
parasites.
—And that’s not all. Every grad student who works with me has to exhibit or other -
wise perform their practice-based research outcomes in a public context. My goal is to 
get them to participate in the local visual, literary, and performance arts communities. 
They are also required to collaboratively and collectively publish notes on their creative 
work and research process in an online format as well as contribute to email lists that 
stimulate dialog around all of these subjects we’re covering.
—Like what?
—Well, copyleft versus copyright for one.
—What’s your take on that?
—In my heart of hearts, I’m against intellectual property. Having said that, I’m even 
more against someone owning my intellectual property and not paying for it. Like the 
academic publishing mafia who try to leverage the fact that tenure-track and would-be/
wannabe professors need to publish with established presses and use that brownie point 
system to club them into submission until they agree to hand over all or most of the 
rights to their work! They really do act as if they are The Untouchables.
—As if the Internet never really happened.
—Exactly. My first collection of artist writings was over 400 pages and most of the 
writing was previously published on the Internet where it was given away for free. I 
intentionally wanted to situate the work in what we think of as the gift economy. But 
MIT Press, the publisher, now owns the copyright to all of that material. Fortunately, for 
the avid information hunter and gatherer, almost all of that work is still available on the 
Net for free.
—Still, it must be weird to give the rights away.
—Totally out of character, really. It’s like, as Ken Wark says, a vast social movement has 
arisen that intuits the significance of digital information as a social fact, right? And in its 
more public and self-conscious forms, this social movement includes Creative Commons, 
the Open Source and Free Software Movement, the student Free Culture movement, etc. 
But this is just the tip of the iceberg. Submerged out of sight is a vast culture of freewheel -
ing digital remixologists who, without even really thinking about the implications of what 
they are doing, are participating in what you might tag digitally distributed transgressive 
shareability  (to rephrase a line from the artist-theorist Bracha Ettinger). Like me, Wark also 
came up against similar issues with the publication of his Hacker Manifesto  with Harvard 
University Press. He too saw how this private, pervasive new economy—a gift economy 
in which the artifact is nothing and its digital information everything—might be an even 
more significant part of this social movement than its more publicly declared aspects. 
Meanwhile, there are these death-defying corporate interests that use the institutionalized 
academic marketplace as their territory, right? It’s like, what else can we own as a way to 
further control the flow of information through these outmoded supply chains.
—Right. So you do all the research, all the writing, all the branding, all the network -
ing, all the clever social media marketing by way of your online presence as a kind of 
pop-intellectual performance artist establishing presence in the reputation economy—
and then they come in at the end and swoop up your data and demand that you let them 
own it so that they can control its flow in perpetuity.
313
REMIXTHECONTEXT (A THEORETICAL FICTION)—Something like that, yes. Not all of them are this way. My last publisher was a 
pleasure to work with and MIT, it should be said, have a great reputation and have 
essentially taken responsibility for keeping the work archived in print and digital librar -
ies where some of your audience is bound to find it. But at what point does this process 
produce overreach? At what point is it not in the academic or artist’s best interest to 
participate in this proprietary overkill?
—I think that’s totally relevant (Saul says—he seems stimulated by the source mate -
rial). Lately, I’ve been wondering, why would I, as a so-called digital humanist who is 
focused on media archaeology, spend all of my productive work time writing books—
books that most, but not all of the reputable academic publishers want to own for their 
own profit? So I can then get promoted to Super-Full Professor? Extra-Special Beyond 
Belief Professor? What’s the incentive here?
—Sure, that’s easy for you to say (says usually silent Tex-Mex, the MFA bodybuilder). 
What about those of us who are hungry for jobs? Everybody has to play the game.
—That’s true, and so now Saul and I have to try and change the way the game is 
played. It’s up to me and the other fully full-of-themselves full professors to start making 
a stink over this process. The system is too gamed. I mean, I am interested in game cul -
ture, game theory, game studies—but is this ancient model of tenure and promotion 
that’s so codependent on “publish or perish” really the only way? This is why I am look -
ing at practice-based research outcomes—exhibitions, performances, software creation, 
transmedia publications, and the like, as one possible alternative. I guess if I can get 
those kinds of outcomes to count as legit criteria for evaluation, get it in writing  as part 
of the institutional bylaws, then that will be part of my legacy too.
—How else do you plan on changing the game?
—Through incremental steps, like the way I’m intentionally sampling and remixing 
prior published writing into this dialog, here, in Café Merz, for the purpose of question -
ing how much I can playfully appropriate myself, claim the work to be “original,” and to 
mix up the issue of what it means to own copyright to something that is really just shop 
talk. What if I were to cut and paste large chunks of this text into an e-book that I self-
publish as part of an exhibition of my conceptual art work whose theme is the slow death 
of reputable print publishers? Or what if someone else were to take my idea and do the 
same, but in a completely different language? As far as I’m concerned, anyone can sam -
ple any of the language being performed in this remix and manipulate it for their own 
transmedia purposes. Hell, I’m doing it too.
—So basically what you’re saying is that your ongoing practice-based research into 
networked and mobile media forms of creativity is partly about the act of remixing 
yourself and nobody can own that, not even you?
—Sure, you could say that. Raymond Federman referred to it is as playgiarism . Get it? 
Play+giarism.
—It sounds familiar. Where would I have heard of that before?
—You probably read it in one of my books or at my remixthebook.com website. I use 
Federman a lot. Basically, for Federman, playgiarism  refers to the intentional, conceptual, 
and playful reuse of existing source material. In Federman’s own use of playgiarism, he 
specifically remixes the different versions of his own personal narrative that he rewrites 
in book form over and over again. He terms this creative method playgiarism writing 
that it should be viewed as a playful self-appropriation . Federman tells us that we are either 
born a playgiarizer or we are not. It’s as simple as that. He says that the laws of playgia -
rism are unwritten, that it’s a taboo  and that like incest, it cannot be legalized. The great 
314
M. AMERIKAplaygiarizers of all time, Homer, Shakespeare, Rabelais, Diderot, Rimbaud, Proust, 
Beckett, and Federman have never pretended to do anything else than playgiarizing. 
Inferior writers deny that they playgiarize because they confuse plagiarism with playgia -
rism. These are not the same. The difference is enormous, but no one has ever been able 
to articulate it as well as I’d like.
—Well, I like that it’s unapologetic.
—It must be. We must be, or else we lose the game. This is why we must, out of neces -
sity, make fun of what playgiarism does while doing it ourselves. To pla ygiarize is to 
perform with and/or playfully manipulate existing source material (thus the playful use 
of the letter “y” as in “play”).
—You wrote about playgiarism in that other essay you recently published, although it 
was in a more cryptic, fictional style. What were you saying again? About how your 
Professor VJ persona is developing some kind of new audiovisual program for his live 
multimedia writing performances?
—Yes, you remember! Do you want to come to my studio and check out this new 
patch I’ve just developed?
—You mean for that software program you’ve been poking away at? What’s it called 
again? Oh, wait, it’s The Playgiarizer ?
—Exactly.
—Sure. Now I know why we’re on this subject again. Let’s just cut and paste ourselves 
into that prior scene and see how this new context creates a measurable différance .
[CUT]
[PASTE]
—So you’re really going to do this? Go back on the road this summer and perform as 
the writerly VJ?
—Yep, my nom de plume will be The Playgiarist.
—The Playgiarist who plays the Playgiarizer.
—Something like that.
—So tell me how it works.
—Actually, I can just show you. What I’ve done is I’ve mashed up voice recognition 
software with this typographic glitch randomizer. Here I’ll speak into the mic and you 
watch what happens to the words on the screen as I speak, OK?
—Cool.
—OK, watch the screen.
—Got it.
—Every decision a person makes stems from the person’s values and goals.
—That’s cool. The screen looks like typographic rain.
—Nice description. Here’s another line I plan on reading in my live set: Software to 
be written vs. codes to be corrupted vs. publishing protocols to be cracked open vs. 
systems to be hacked.
—Wow, that looks great. Radical typographimania.
—Yeah, now watch this: Programs that look at you vs. programs that read you vs. 
programs that write you vs. programs that seduce you into touching them back.
—Huh. I’ve never seen anything like that before. I’m not even sure how you could 
visualize that in a book.
—Here’s another one: Programs that are living vs. programs that are dead vs. crunch -
ing numbers vs. drowning in a vat of involuntary secretions.
—Did you see that glitch? Do it again.
315
REMIXTHECONTEXT (A THEORETICAL FICTION)—Programs that stimulate a body’s thought process vs. programs that bring you to a 
creative climax vs. the programmatic stealing of an entire historical era’s intellectual 
labor.
—That was weird.
—The disappearing unified subject vs. personae as shareware vs. a textually inhabited 
series of social media art performances under duress.
—Did you see that?! It was as if James Joyce himself had invented augmented 
reality.
—Biting the hand that feeds you vs. eating the entire arm attached to the hand that 
feeds you vs. opening your mouth so wide you eat yourself vs. excreting yourself on the 
page that authorizes your presence.
—Your presence in academia , no doubt. Can I try it?
—Sure.
—Programs that read your mind vs. programs that undress you vs. programs that 
undress yourself vs. programs that just rip their codes off.
—Again.
—Programs that produce counterfeit paracurrencies vs. programs that show disdain 
for human authenticity vs. programs that leak aesthetic information vs. programs that 
have no taste.
—One more.
—Programs that run in auto-affect mode vs. programs that transform the networked 
intelligentsia into a monopolized niche market vs. programs that auto-shift reality and 
trigger novelty.
Professor VJ bid his colleague adieu and rushed upstairs where one quick administrative 
detail required his attention, and then he went back down into the basement lab where 
his digital seminar room was squeezed with grad students awaiting him.
—OK, I want to start the session by throwing out some quotes and random phrasings 
as more open source just to see what we can do with them today. Take your thinking 
caps off and rev up your remixological engines. Let’s just go straight to the unconscious 
readiness potential that keeps the creative spirit alive and role-play our intersubjective 
agency as ancient remixologists dressed in the latest technological fashion, OK? This is 
what it means to be present, right? Or maybe you feel like a ghost today? Do you guys 
know who once wrote that “a guest + a host = a ghost?”
—Duchamp.
—Yeah, great, exactly, how did you know?
—You told us last week.
—Oh, did I? Maybe I’m my own ghost remixologically inhabiting the spirit of my 
presence from last week?
—A new refutation of time.
—Who wrote this? “If it’s true that we’re all born remixers who unconsciously manip -
ulate the data of everyday life as part of our ongoing social media or performance art 
practice—and I think we are—then remixology is the study of how we do that and the 
ways we turn this daily, even ritualized remix practice into emergent forms of personal 
expression.”
—You did.
—Correct.
—Thank you for cutting and pasting it into the seminar scene too.
316
M. AMERIKA—You’re very welcome. The idea, of course, is to get us to start thinking about some 
of the context this language of remix theory manifests itself in. It’s not necessarily some -
thing you will encounter at a live audiovisual performance, right?
—Unless it’s your performance.
—Correct again. But let’s introduce the concept of transmedia narrative as well.
—Can you explain what that term really means?
—Well, meaning is subject to remix just like everything else, so perhaps we should 
ask ourselves what is transmedia narrative in the Wikipedia sense of the term, and what 
value does it have for contemporary artists? The traditional art and entertainment indus -
tries would have us believe that transmedia is a powerful marketing concept that uses 
new media technologies to aggregate fragmented audiences by delivering story informa -
tion across multiple media platforms. But as a remix artist who is investigating these 
“ways of filtering”—and here I am remixing Jon Berger’s idea of “ways of seeing”—and 
who experiments with his conceptual language art practice in the fields of digital distri -
bution as well as in relation to social media performance, I am hoping to—if you will—
reclaim the term “transmedia narrative” for my own uses as I try to imagine how frag -
mented stories being told by amateur-auteurs resist what the commercially minded aca -
demics call “convergence.” In fact, the idea of convergence doesn’t really match up well 
when discussed in relation to audience or even story fragmentation. It’s part of a very 
old-fashioned modernist agenda that gets theorized by industry-friendly academics 
where we are asked to buy into the idea that everything will magically come together in 
this technologically sophisticated utopia. To me, this seems so anachronistic given how 
distributed and personalized social media networking feels to me (think Hakim Bey’s 
Temporary Autonomous Zones ) especially in these times of faux prosperity and real-world, 
dystopian financial ruin. It is my hope that new media artists, many of whom identify 
with the historical avant-garde, can now expand the forms of transmedia narrative to 
foreground this antidisciplinary  approach to encompass both contemporary practice and 
theory.
—Can you remind us what you mean by “antidisciplinary”?
—Sure. What does it take for networked scenes of artists who employ strategic remix 
methodologies to produce—or, in my version, perpetually postproduce —novel forms of 
togetherness? How would we want to start measuring the value of the aesthetic traces 
remix artists leave while proactively navigating our practices through these antidiscipli -
nary spaces we happen to occupy-when-making . The terms are intentionally loaded—
“antidisciplinary” suggesting a mashup of antiauthoritarian and interdisciplinary—and 
the idea of “occupying” as remixologically inhabiting—something absolutely connected 
to the global occupy performances that were initially started by the magazine collective 
associated with Adbusters , a culture jamming remix crew if ever there was one.
—Is your artwork, Immobilité  a transmedia narrative?
—You’re about two steps ahead of me. But, yes, let’s talk about Immobilité  as a quick 
case study. You guys know where to find that, right? It’s at immobilite.com. OK, so in 
the US, we call films from other countries “foreign films.” Now, when I was a teenager, 
watching foreign films, which none of my friends wanted to do, changed who I was. It 
turned me on to this alternative way of processing narrative. First of all, since I only 
spoke English, I had to read the films every step of the way. This means that my favorite 
films, the ones that changed my life, are always films that I have had to read. But by 
reading, I am operating on many different conscious, subconscious and/or unconscious 
levels, because I am also seeing and listening and even moving, too. I’m filtering. For 
317
REMIXTHECONTEXT (A THEORETICAL FICTION)me, movies, or motion pictures, have always been about moving, the art of riding with 
or on someone else’s rhythm, and learning to process those rhythms and layer them or 
remix them into my own ever-shifting rhythms. In remixthebook , I refer to this process 
of embodying rhythms as moving-remixing and I must say, sampling and remixing for -
eign movements have completely altered both my style and my life’s story. Moving with 
Antonioni is different than moving with Bergman is different than moving with Marker 
is different than moving with Varda is different than moving with Cassavetes. And here 
is where I really disturb the commercial theories and premises of so-called transmedia 
narrative: for me, this moving-remixing of different rhythms—these always-live post -
production sets I am intersubjectively navigating while reading other narratives—is 
what informs the ongoing distribution of my own transmedia narrative over the net -
worked and mobile media environments I circulate in. And so the phrase “foreign film” 
can now, for me, be applied to much more than film per se. I can apply it to this inves -
tigation of—for example—choreographing the way we mobilize our states of presence 
over the network  . . . and if I were to put a footnote here, which I’m not, but if I were to 
put a footnote here I would also reference the concept of choragraphy  in relation to the 
Internet theories of Gregory Ulmer who tells us that choragraphy is a state of mind, or 
a state of anticipatory consciousness where invention takes place—and here I am 
reminded of Mallarme’s notion of nothing having taken place but the place . This is like say -
ing that nothing will have been remixed but the remix process itself, except in this case, 
and throughout remixthebook , we find that it’s the unconscious readiness potential of the 
postproduction artist who creates novel forms of togetherness that ultimately triggers 
this performative gesture.
—So remix is both part of the production and postproduction methods? I guess they 
kind of blur.
—Yes, you could say that. While in Cornwall, the cast and crew would magically 
convene via a localized social networking scene and the time limit for research and 
production was something like five–six weeks. Kate Southworth and the team she 
directed in iRES, the Interactive Art and Design Research Cluster, were incredibly 
generous and agreed to my proposition. A then brand new, just released Nokia N95 
mobile phone with a first generation mobile-phone ready Carl Zeiss lens and something 
like video recording technology was purchased and waiting for me upon my arrival. 
Once I was there, I was literally on location and in production.
But this is where I want to get a little philosophical with you and suggest that being 
“in production” is a ruse because, in fact, we are all always already in postproduction . 
The digitally born avant-garde remixer is always  in postproduction. In fact, they 
must—out of necessity—acquire an elaborate skills-set focused at the interface of 
electracy —what Ulmer sees as electricity + literacy—so that they may constantly 
manipulate the data of everyday life. This is when transmedia narrative becomes a 
work-in-progress distributed across the networked and mobile media environments 
ones social practice unfolds in. For me, this is what being creative is becoming all 
about. Becoming all about . Think of that phrase for a moment. The creative act, as 
Duchamp called it, is embedded in our unconscious readiness potential—and by that 
I mean it’s something that is quite naturally triggered when we find ourselves caught 
in the heat of the remixological moment—the simultaneous and continuous fusion of 
moments that comprise the artfulness of what it means to always be in postproduction , 
to become an intuitive medium engaged with digital media while caught in the heat 
of the creative act.
318
M. AMERIKA—This doesn’t sound like your typical film production.
—No, far from it. To give you a behind-the-scenes idea of what it’s like to make an 
artwork like Immobilité , let me start by saying that Immobilité  self-consciously remixes the 
rhythms and styles of European art-house directors such as Bergman, Antonioni, Varda, 
Cassavetes, Marker, and Ackerman, but also the underground film work of artists like 
Andy Warhol, Carolee Schneemann, Stan Brakhage, Maya Deren, and others  . . . and 
here it should be noted that during our making of the work, in the summer of 2007, one 
very late night that went into early morning, we found out that both Bergman and 
Antonioni died on the same day, and this unquestionable fact also fed into our collective 
and collaborative conversations and mood as we continued socializing the project as an 
always in-process performance art event. What would these deaths do to us? How would 
they tweak our collective social filters as we collaboratively postproduced our feelings 
while making the “foreign film?”
—Why foreign film?
—This idea of a “foreign film” as part of a new series of feature-length works is related 
to what Atom Egoyan once wrote. In the introduction to a book titled Subtitles , Egoyan 
writes, “Every film is a foreign film.” This concept of the “foreign film” relates to my 
initial impulse to mashup the DIY amateurism of mobile phone video performers playing 
with the aesthetics of YouTube-styled vernacular video with the predominantly European 
art-house auteur cinema that as an undergraduate film student at UCLA radically 
altered my vision of the world. My sense was that this was an area ripe for discovery.
Now, as an artwork, Immobilité  remixes other media besides film. The work not only 
remixes the stylistic tendencies or rhythms of filmmakers. As I mentioned, the work was 
shot on location in Cornwall and the wild and beachy landscapes appear throughout. I 
shot the scenes with this early version of mobile phone video recording technology, in 
my case the Nokia N95, and really wanted to see what was possible regarding experi -
mental hand-held techniques and very self-consciously used this small device that I 
could hold in the palm of my hand as a kind of lens-brush, if you will, one that I could 
manipulate through all kinds of hand-held gestural moves that I would improvisationally 
choreograph with the actor-players as part of our collaborative spatial and social prac -
tice. This ended up involving the gradual building of a small network of actors and crew 
members who basically just hang out together and make the work by sharing their sto -
ries, their books, their websites, their music, their food, and their movement through 
the project as it develops. I’m sure many low-budget independent films and underground 
art rock bands have created new work in this kind of environment as well.
—The landscapes are beautiful.
—Thanks. The landscapes are also clever remixes of paintings but involve the experi -
mental use of the mobile phone video technology. In fact, the look and feel of many of 
the experimental landscape shots are absolutely informed by the painterly rhythms of 
the post-World War II British Abstract Expressionists who, for the most part, resided in 
Cornwall, along with Surrealist refugees from the European continent who were them -
selves escaping their war-torn countries but were also, like all artists who eventually 
come to learn once they live in Cornwall, dramatically affected by the light. It ends up 
that the lineage of painterly light artists, from the naïve fishermen of the late nineteenth 
century, to the British Abstract Expressionists and temporary Surrealist residents, 
directly inform many of the abstract landscape imagery found throughout Immobilité . 
And then there are all of the writerly remixes as well, and here I specifically mean the 
subtitles, 90 percent of which are sampled and remixed from other films, novels, poems, 
319
REMIXTHECONTEXT (A THEORETICAL FICTION)and philosophical tracts that were circulating within our social network during the making  
of the film.
—So this feature-length foreign film operates on a number of simultaneous levels or 
layers of remixological inhabitation.
—Precisely. But you could have read all of this in my blog. The one I give away for free 
over the Internet . This is just my live performance version of it. I remixed certain ele -
ments for consistency.
—So does that mean we can go now?
—No, not yet. I would like us to go together to the immobilite.com website and look 
at it as well as listen to some of the video and audio remixes. I think once we leave this 
page behind us you’ll get a better sense of what I’ve been talking about.
Bibliography (Source Material)
Amerika, Mark. Remixology (A Theoretical Fiction) . http://median.s151960.gridserver.com/?page_id=99 
(accessed December 5, 2013).
——. remixthebook . http://www.remixthebook.com (accessed December 5, 2013).
Bey, Hakim. Temporary Autonomous Zones . http://hermetic.com/bey/taz_cont.html (accessed December 
5, 2013).
Bush, Vannevar. “As We May Think.” The Atlantic . http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/
archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/303881/ (accessed December 5, 2013).
Federman, Raymond. PLAJEU . http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/federman/shoes/plajeu.htm (accessed 
December 5, 2013).
Professor VJ. Professor VJ . http://professorvj.blogspot.com (accessed December 5, 2013).
Ulmer, Gregory. The Chora Collaborations . http://www.rhizomes.net/issue18/ulmer/ (accessed December 
5, 2013)
——. Choragraphy (A Map) . http://ensemble.va.com.au/enslogic/text/ulm_lct.htm (accessed December 
5, 2013)
Wark, McKenzie. Copyright, Copyleft, Copygift . http://www.skor.nl/_files/Files/OPEN12_P22-
29%281%29.pdf (accessed December 5, 2013).
This page intentionally left blank
Part IV
POLITICS
This page intentionally left blank
23
A CAPITAL REMIX
Rachel O’Dwyer
In May 2012, Harry Rodrigues, aka DJ Baauer, released a sampled dance track called 
“Harlem Shake.”1 Initially little known, the song developed into a pandemic Internet 
meme in Spring 2013. An initial video by George Miller of friends dancing to the track 
went viral.2 Versions of Baauer’s “Harlem Shake” circulated on YouTube, with countless 
amateurs making and uploading interpretations. Amateur and professional musicians 
released sanctioned and unauthorized remixes of the track.3 For a short time, the “Shake” 
was lauded for highlighting the grassroots nature of media organization and the signifi -
cant role of amateur and user-generated content in shaping contemporary culture.
Such enthusiasm was short lived. A number of theorists argued that this Internet 
meme—far from being a spontaneous, bottom-up phenomenon—was engineered by 
corporations who stood to benefit from the circulation of content.4 Shortly after the first 
video was uploaded, Time Warner subsidiary Maker Studios, who specialize in extracting 
revenue from YouTube videos, produced an imitation dance video and promoted it 
extensively through their social media channels.5 Consequently the meme produced 
value for Google (the proprietor of YouTube), who extracted advertising revenue from 
its circulation. Further revenue went to entertainment conglomerate Warner Bros. and 
its subsidiary Time Warner for the distribution rights to the track and to corporations 
such as Volkswagen and Pepsi Max, who used the meme in a Super Bowl commercial in 
February 2013.6 Interestingly, DJ Baauer allegedly did not profit from the track’s success 
due to legal issues surrounding the clearance of samples used in the song.7
“Harlem Shake” highlights many conflicts concerning the production and distribu -
tion of remix in contemporary culture. Remix culture is thought to cultivate a more 
critical and democratic culture driven by users as opposed to corporations. So too, as an 
activity that thrives on social production and the free exchange of culture, remix dis -
rupts an economy that extracts value from the enclosure of intellectual and cultural 
products, threatening the monopoly of corporations who have succeeded in privatizing 
these goods. As the “Harlem Shake” meme demonstrates, however, transformations to 
the cultural industries mean that the nonmarket potential of remix is now contested. 
Forms of attention, spontaneous creativity and bottom-up circulation are among the 
main sources of value in the contemporary economy.
Elaborating on these competing perspectives and their situation within a political 
economy of Internet culture, this chapter will rethink the practice of remix and the 
accumulation of value from remix in light of significant transformations to creative work 
and to the cultural industries. This involves first looking at the ways in which remix is 
324
R. O’DWYERpresented as a nonmarket and often anticommercial practice, before examining the 
transformations that situate remix at the center of an economy where cultural content 
is now a primary driver of wealth.
Remix and Free Culture
Both the products and practices of remix are frequently understood as nonmarket and 
nonproprietary. They fall within the broader remit of what is sometimes called “free 
culture,” referring to the social production of information and culture over digitally 
networked media.8 Progressing alongside the countercultural and hacker movements of 
the 1980s through to present-day collaborative production in Web 2.0, free culture has 
emerged as a countercapitalist ideology. Free culture builds on interrelated claims regard -
ing the economic nature of cultural goods, the nature of creative work, and the techno -
logical affordances of digital networks. These claims underpin an ideology of remix as a 
noncommercial practice and as an anticapitalist practice. They require further 
elaboration.
First of all, the outputs of cultural production are thought to resist commercial enclo -
sure and marketization. The kinds of goods commonly produced through networked 
media platforms such as information, software, images, music, and cultural texts, are 
classified as “immaterial” or “intangible.”9 Material and tangible goods like food and 
shelter are to different degrees “rival” goods, meaning their use or consumption by one 
individual prevents or inhibits consumption by others. Where such goods are in demand 
they are typically consolidated in property relations and provisioned by a pricing system. 
Immaterial goods, on the other hand, are by nature “nonrival,” meaning they are shared 
easily and with little cost. As a result such goods are socially provisioned and equally 
they are not easily absorbed into a market or corralled as private property.10 Consequently, 
immaterial goods such as those produced through remix are candidates for substantial 
nonmarket production. In order to make culture profitable within a market, various 
forms of artificial scarcity in the shape of intellectual property or licensing have to be 
produced to effect economic competition.
Second, not only are these goods not easily enclosed, the “work” they require to pro -
duce—creative and collaborative practices—isn’t easily managed by organized labor or 
wages. Instead free culture generally describes outputs that are voluntarily produced 
outside of work hours and often given away for free without the expectation of future 
economic returns. So too, the “work” required for the production of these cultural goods 
also requires the purest expression of the self; it primarily stems from passion, enthusi -
asm, a desire for social connection, and a hedonistic pursuit of creativity and 
knowledge.11
Third, the technological affordances of digitally networked media are thought to sup -
port not only new forms of production and distribution of content, but also new systems 
of peer production and decentralized organization conducive to nonmarket cooperation. 
Free culture is premised on a consumer electronics culture that places the means of 
production (and reproduction) in the hands of the majority of individuals in developed 
societies. However, not only the ubiquity of these communications media, but also their 
technical organization, is significant to fostering free culture. There are topological and 
legislative dimensions to cooperation outside of market signals or managerial command 
and the decentralized and nonhierarchical organization of digital networks is thought 
to facilitate these.12
325
A CAPITAL REMIX Remix Is Anticapitalist
Remix has a privileged position in free culture as its practices and outputs not only 
encourage the nonmarket reproduction and distribution of cultural texts, they actively 
contest the commercial industries that threaten the commonality of culture. Many 
people who write about remix take the view that culture is produced by the whole of 
society and should not belong to any single individual or corporation.13 Practices that 
flout copyright present a threat to corporations that rely on the production of artificial 
scarcity and proprietary constraints over goods in order to make a profit. In this way 
remix presents a direct sabotage to the cultural industries with its own instruments. 
As a cultural expression that relies on the multiplicity of texts, remix disrupts the 
dynamics of those collusive media corporations that have succeeded in privatizing 
cultural goods. So, too, as a practice largely concerned with quotation and circulation, 
in economic terms, remix does not produce any new object, but instead is parasitical 
to the cultural industries. It strategically utilizes techniques for networked appropria -
tion, reproduction, and circulation to contest the commercial expropriation of forms 
of symbolic and cultural value.
Furthermore, we can argue that digital content is often produced in the spirit of 
nonmarket communality, and this is particularly so with remixes, mashups, and recuts 
of all kinds. Not only are these works often produced without any expectation of 
financial remuneration, they often eschew notions of authorship and subsequently 
origins, property, and their associated restrictions to use, abuse, profit, and transfer. As 
a practice, remix rejects the commodity status associated with symbolic and cultural 
products. Even where a certain fetishism pervades the outputs of earlier DJ cultures, 
this is less often the case with digitally networked forms of remix. Instead the contem -
porary mashup is thought to emerge as less of a homage and more of a backlash against 
the cultural authority and administrative perspectives of professionalized cultural 
practitioners and against the commodity fetishism of the cultural object more 
generally.14
Remix as Discourse
Alongside its substantially nonmarket origins, a number of theorists argue that remix 
also allows for the expression of anticapitalist and political viewpoints.15 If historically 
a particular linguistic capital was required for entry into a political or public sphere,16 
the tools of remix cultivate another kind of political vocabulary, migrating from the 
manipulation of language to the manipulation of rich media content.
Remix often involves the adoption of cultural memes, tropes, and popular references 
both to situate and to dramatize contemporary political discourses. Familiar images, 
melodies and popular references are reflected, recombined, and recontextualized to pro -
duce the remix as a vehicle for communicating and expressing political opinion. Thus, 
remix is a rich discourse that communicates through the troubling and defamiliarization 
of shared associations. Take, for example, the “Occupy Gotham” montages that circu -
lated around the Occupy movement’s highlight of wealth inequality, or the ubiquitous 
“Pepper Spray Cop” meme that followed on alleged excessive force in student demon -
strations in University of California, Davis.
Eduardo Navas17 and Henry Jenkins18 have both separately argued that remix consti -
tutes a form of discourse, because its communicative effect relies on its broader position 
326
R. O’DWYERwithin a system of signs, dependent on its conceptual association and historical position 
in relation to other cultural texts. In Remix Theory , Navas describes this as a modular 
repetition, in which the remix draws on and extends an archive of shared knowledge 
and culture, building on tropes and imaginaries, at times referencing and at other times 
disrupting tacit understandings and literacies.19 If shared language is one kind of cultural 
commons—something we can’t really imagine being privatized or “owned”—then 
understanding remix as a discourse also points to the totality of a society’s cultural out -
puts as another kind of commons, with a vitality that is excessive to any commercial or 
proprietary claim made by a single corporation or individual. This drives home the idea 
that making and remaking culture is a social and collective activity that cannot and 
should not be corralled as property.
Remix Is Central to the Economy
Like much of the ideology of free culture, however, the emancipatory potential of 
remix is arguably contested and at best, overstated. Following on a series of transfor -
mations to the relations of production, the technical composition of labor and the 
property regimes under which labor produces, we can no longer think of remix as 
operating in fundamental opposition to the market or indeed as fundamentally anti -
capitalist. Today symbolic and cultural value is central to the economy, work has 
aligned itself with artistic and cultural production and the tools and platforms under -
pinning that work, while superficially accessible, are substantially owned and con -
trolled by corporations.
Today the process of wealth accumulation extends beyond material goods to include 
informational and cultural goods of all kinds.20 This doesn’t mean that industrial  
production disappears; rather, the value of material goods—cars, trainers, consumer 
electronics—is increasingly subordinate to immaterial factors, contingent on all kinds 
of symbolic, cultural, aesthetic, and social outputs that are produced by the whole of 
society. Consequently, a number of theorists argue that the primary driver of wealth in 
society now comes from cultural attributes.21 The value of software conglomerates and 
social media networks capitalize on user-generated content; urban real estate and tourist 
destinations often derive much of their value from local cultural injections; and con -
sumer brands feed on the tastes and distinction of youth cultures and subcultural groups 
to name just a few examples.22 Remix arguably has a significant role to play in this 
economy.
The conditions under which informational and cultural capital is produced also 
involve transformations to labor. Work is requalified and recomposed in such a way that 
the activities associated with remix culture are now productive to the economy. Forms 
of human attention, creativity, and bottom-up circulation are now the main sources of 
value for software companies, advertising agencies, and crowd-sourcing marketplaces. 
Artistic and cultural production, the formation of norms and public opinion, the fixing 
of tastes, the development of relations of trust and cooperation, and the circulation of 
desire are now part and parcel of the contemporary composition of labor.
From this perspective the outputs and productivity of remix are extremely valuable to 
contemporary capitalism. Furthermore, the figure of the “remixer” as an artist, fan, or 
playful individual engaged is the ideal laboring subject for the contemporary economy, 
as a worker that does not recognize subjugation in their labor, who often does not even 
expect to be paid, but instead associates their practice with freedom, play, and creative 
327
A CAPITAL REMIX expression, even as these activities—making, responding to and circulating remixes—
produce economic value for others.
Remix and Value Capture
Let’s look more closely at some of the ways that the work of remix can be said to produce 
economic value. When capital expropriates informational and cultural products, value 
capture relies, not on direct intervention, but on the production of a strategic position 
with respect to forms of free cultural production. This system of accumulation isn’t so 
much about paying a wage for labor that produces surplus value that is subsequently 
reinvested in production. Instead it becomes about using the ownership of some 
resource—cultural products or digital networks or real estate for example—to extract 
value from a position external to creative production. Even as it functions as a rejection 
of the commodity status of the object, therefore, the remix constitutes an extended and 
developed investment in forms of cultural and “subcultural” value that can be extracted, 
translated, and reinvested into commercial goods. There are a number of different ways 
in which this comes about.
A straightforward instance is where the cultural currency of remix is used directly to 
market commodities, harvesting the cool factor associated with a niche or subculture. 
For example, the anticapitalist and antiproprietary character of remix can actually be 
utilized to produce revenue at a remove, conferring symbolic value to commercial prod -
ucts it comes to be associated with.23 This produces a cultural value that can be con -
verted and reinvested in the sale of commodities. This might be in a direct form, where 
remix is channeled into related venue promotion or legitimate record sales. Or it might 
be used indirectly in the sale of mass-produced commodity goods such as cars or high-
street fashion.
If remix subcultures are commercialized to confer status to a commercial good, adver -
tisements targeting fans of music and video remixes are also inserted into noncommer -
cial remixes on media platforms. Instead of working on the cultural cachet of the remix 
to sell products, this approach also relies on the creative work of the remixer, who pro -
duces something other people want to pay attention to, as well as the work of the remix 
audience, who are obliged to respond to and distribute commercial messages to their 
peer group in order to access a remix.
This approach can be identified in YouTube’s revenue model. Since its development 
as a video platform, YouTube has been home to remix distribution of all kinds, and 
platform owners and individual producers alike have encountered difficulties hosting 
and circulating remixes that appropriate material from copyrighted sources in the public 
domain. In the past this has often led to the removal of content deemed to infringe 
copyright on behalf of powerful industry conglomerates. More recently however, the 
distribution platform has adopted a different approach to the management and moneti -
zation of remix in a way that is commercially productive for the platform owner and for 
the holder of the distribution rights to media content. Rather than expressly forbidding 
and removing content that is deemed to infringe on intellectual property, using CopyID 
software developed by Google, YouTube now identifies contributions that draw on copy -
righted material and inserts advertisements into these. Following the logic of Google’s 
Adsense algorithm—an advertising system that monetizes a user’s attention (clicks) to 
commercial messages—these advertisements subsequently produce value that accrues to 
the video platform and to the license holder.24 This extracts value from the work of the 
328
R. O’DWYERremix artist and from the work of his or her audience, who are obliged to attend to com -
mercial content in exchange for access to the cultural product. The remix as tune, idea, 
catch phrase, fashion, or meme becomes a consumer object.
We can also consider remix in terms of a broader corporate philosophy of open inno -
vation and codesign that expands the sphere of production to the extent that the con -
sumer now becomes an active producer of value. As Read argues: “Our culture is obsessed 
with remixing content and showing individuality.”25 Brands should look to embrace this 
by creating content and messages that can be remixed and easily passed on.26
In this sense we can identify the remix as a labor and innovation model central to 
many industries today, redolent of the increased role of codesign and collaborative pro -
duction in a variety of industries and the rise of open innovation models in corporate 
R&D and design. Nike, as a core example, has opened up its designs to consumers, 
allowing them to “remix” their trainers with NIKEiD.27 So too, many software compa -
nies have opened aspects of their software, websites, or APIs to third party developers 
for innovation, mashup, and improvement, where the risks of innovation are socialized 
while the substantial market benefits are privatized under a powerful corporation or 
brand.
These examples of the ways that remix is economically productive also force us to 
reconsider the role of remix as a discursive practice. Theorist Jodi Dean has argued that 
networked communication technologies transform the political content of “messages” 
into mere circulatory contributions to cognitive capitalism.28 The exchange value of a 
message obfuscates its use value; contributions need not be understood or responded to, 
only repeated, reproduced, and forwarded in an endless economy of circulation. The 
content of the message and subsequently its discursive potential are subordinate to the 
act of circulation; the only thing of significance is its network value: where it has trav -
elled to, how many people have seen it, and how it illustrates connections between 
individuals, commercial tastes, and habits of consumption. In this light the remix 
becomes less of a discourse and more of a circulation of different perspectives robbed of 
any political potential.29
Critical and Reflexive Remix
From this perspective, the “sabotage” potentiated by the remix is more symbolic than 
material. While the remix might appear to challenge some aspect of the market econ -
omy (most typically intellectual property), it normally does not engage the broader 
conditions structuring cultural production in networked environments. These include 
the vertical integration of large media and software companies; the ownership of  
creative tools, platforms, and network infrastructure; and the various algorithmic and 
codified systems of value accumulation surrounding user-generated content. While cul -
tivating a critical practice is important, therefore, it is also necessary to consider how 
issues of control and ownership extend beyond the text or file to inflect channels for 
content production and distribution. I would like to conclude by attending to remix 
practices that not only contest intellectual property and artificial scarcity, but also the 
dynamics of value accumulation in contemporary networks.
A classic definition of remix refers to rich media texts composed of samples drawn 
from popular culture. But there is also an expanded understanding of remix that alludes 
to the critical recomposition of two or more sources of digital content. The former is 
principally aesthetic work that relies on cultural literacy for legitimacy and meaning; the 
329
A CAPITAL REMIX latter approaches the assembly of sources in ways that use aspects of the remix, such as 
scraping, aggregating, and juxtaposing informational content, to engage the underlying 
mechanisms of networked media and value extraction.
Navas refers to this second practice as “reflexive” and uses the term “regenerative 
remix” to designate the dynamic and real-time aspects of this practice.30 This form of 
remix is particularly common in software mashups, utilized by commercial media forms 
such as the video platform, search engine, and social media platform as well as by eve -
ryday individuals in the development of live feeds, interactive maps, and mobile applica -
tions. This practice is not only reflexive in the sense that it reflects on cultural texts and 
cultural production. In the context of a political economy of remix, the most interesting 
works mirror the economic, financial, and political concatenations of cultural value and 
expropriation in the networks the work operates within. This is more about producing 
tactics that are parasitical to the systems of accumulation operating over remix culture 
than attempting to produce content that is somehow autonomous or authentic. Here 
remix intersects with politicized practices such as hactivism31 and tactical media.32 
Furthermore, the work produced is not a static cultural object but a generative process 
that relies on dynamic streams of information and the future interventions of users to 
build upon what is produced. Where political and economic questions are concerned 
this approach has much to offer.
For example, much of the hactivist work produced by Alessandro Ludovico and Paolo 
Cirio as part of the Hacking Monopolism Trilogy  can be characterized as a form of reflexive 
remix. Amazon Noir  (2006) used an algorithm coded by Cirio to extract the content of 
Amazon Books through the online “Search Inside” preview function. These were recon -
structed as PDFs and distributed free of charge on a dedicated website. As the work 
appropriates and arranges samples of copyrighted texts, the artist’s narrative presentation 
of the book “heist” also appropriates and remixes the familiar tropes of film noir and 
detective fiction, where the artist team present themselves as the “bad guys” operating 
against the “good guy” image of the Amazon Corporation, who are eventually victorious 
in their battle against book theft.33 The third in the trilogy, Face-to-Facebook  (2011), 
provocatively scraped one million user profiles from the social media site and used the 
profile content to develop a custom dating website (lovely-faces.com) sorted by the 
facial expression characteristics of its involuntary members.34
In 2012 Golan Levin circulated a toolkit that allows users to reassemble everyday 
objects. Levin’s  Free Universal Construction Kit  (a purposeful acronym) is a matrix of 3D 
printable blocks that enable interoperability between popular children’s construction 
toys. This work uses digitally networked media tools to facilitate the remix of physical 
objects. The kit comprises a set of downloadable digital design files for two-way adapter 
pieces that can be used to interface between toys such as Bristle Blocks, LEGO, Duplo, 
Fischertechnik, and K’Nex. These adapters open a previously closed system of objects, 
allowing elements to assemble in playful, unprecedented ways, “enabling radically hybrid 
constructive play, the creation of previously impossible designs, and ultimately, more 
creative opportunities for kids.”35 As remix, the Free Universal Construction Kit  gestures 
to and challenges the systems of production and the property relations around which 
commercial artifacts are traditionally fabricated. It also uses the tools that are so success -
ful in the remix of digital files to extend into material cultures. While the transformative 
potential of 3D printing is still in question, conceptually this project allows us to think 
about remix as a potential challenge to our everyday material cultures and built 
environment.
330
R. O’DWYERConclusion
This chapter explores two alternative perspectives on the political economy of remix: 
first as part of the broader ideology of free culture, contributing to noncommercial and 
critical culture and second as a practice that is implicated in the broader valorization 
of networked cultural products, where the work of the remix artist and the remix audi -
ence produce value for the owners of media content, networked platforms, and net -
work infrastructure. In the development of remix culture these two perspectives are 
highly conflictive; it is not always clear when a cultural object mixes with systems of 
circulation, appropriation, and reappropriation whether the outcome contests or 
reproduces the commercial regime. It is clear that we need to think critically about 
not only the formal content of the remix but attend to the underlying platforms and 
tools used for culture production and distribution of network media. This includes 
recognizing not only how the ownership of content but also the ownership of network 
infrastructure and platforms plays a significant role in the commercial expropriation 
of remix culture. In turn we also need to give further consideration to the develop -
ment of a remix toolkit for mining and scraping data, for the peer-to-peer distribution 
of content, for hacking digital rights management systems and disrupting the artificial 
scarcity of common cultural goods.
Notes
 1 The song featured samples from a 2001 Plastic Little track, “Miller Time.”
 2 Jason Notte, “Harlem Shake Was One Big Google Commercial,” April 1, 2013, http://money.msn.com/
now/post.aspx?post=f60d7312-f99d-4ab8-ba55-a9723ad8f69e.
 3 Remixes were produced by: Dave Silcox, Azealia Banks, Filthy Disco, Rob Luna, Manish Law, Kid Womp. 
Harlem Shaker “Top Ten Harlem Shake Remix,” June 10, 2013, http://harlemshakeoriginal.com/top-
10-harlem-shake-remix/ (accessed August 11, 2014).
 4 Kevin Ashton, “You Didn’t Make the Harlem Shake Go Viral—Corporations Did” March 28, 2013, 
http://qz.com/67991/you-didnt-make-the-harlem-shake-go-viral-corporations-did/; Notte, “Harlem 
Shake”; Kim Peterson, “How ‘Harlem Shake’ Became a No. 1 Song,” February 2, 2013, http://money.msn.
com/now/how-harlem-shake-became-a-no-1-song.
 5 Ashton, “You Didn’t Make the Harlem Shake go Viral.”
 6 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e83YtSzGHC8 (accessed August 11, 2014).
 7 David McCormack, “Harlem Shake DJ Baauer Made NOTHING from Global Hit Due to Legal 
Loophole,” Daily Mail  August 20, 2013.
 8 Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and 
Control Creativity  (London: Penguin, 2004).
 9 This refers to a product or a good whose use and/or exchange value resides in “informational and cultural 
content” rather than in some tangible form. Maurizio Lazzarato, “Immaterial Labor,” in Radical Thought 
in Italy: A Potential Politics , ed. Paolo Virno and Michael Hardy (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press 1996): 133–147; Yann Moulier Boutang, Cognitive Capitalism  (Cambridge: Polity, 2012).
10 Michel Bauwens, “The Political Economy of Peer Production,” CTheory  1 (2005); Yochai Benkler, The 
Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom  (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2006); James Boyle, “The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the 
Public Domain,” Law and Contemporary Problems  66, no. 1/2 (2003): 33–74.
11 Moulier Boutang, Cognitive Capitalism , 88–89.
12 Francois Bar, Walter Baer, Sharham Ghanderharizadeh and Fernando Ordonez “Infrastructure: Network 
Neutrality and Network Futures,” in Networked Publics , ed. Kazys Varnelis (London: MIT Press, 2008), 
109–144.
13 See, for example, the work of Cory Doctorow, Henry Jenkins, and Lawrence Lessig: Cory Doctorow, Pirate 
Cinema  (CorDoc-Co, Ltd (UK), 2012); Henry Jenkins, “Multiculturalism, Appropriation, and the New 
Media Literacies: Remixing Moby Dick,” in Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss (New York: 
Springer, 2010); Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down 
331
A CAPITAL REMIX Culture and Control Creativity  (London: Penguin, 2004); and Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and 
Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (London: Penguin, 2008).
14 John Shiga, “Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-Up Culture,” Critical Studies in Media Communication  
24, no. 2 (2007): 107.
15 See Richard L. Edwards and Chuck Tryon, “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen 
Empowerment” First Monday  14, no. 10 (2009) http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/2617/2305; and Jenkins, “Multiculturalism.”
16 Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois 
Society  (London: MIT Press, 1991).
17 Eduardo Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture,” in Mashup Cultures  ed. Stefan 
Sonvilla-Weiss (New York: Springer, 2010).
18 Henry Jenkins, “Multiculturalism.” In conversation with Jonathan McIntosh, November 17, 2010. 
Jenkins also alluded to the relations between remix and discourse in a keynote address at the 2012 
Technology Conference in UCLA in January 2012.
19 Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling (New York: Springer, 2012), 30–31.
20 Slavoj Žižek, “The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie,” London Review of Books  34, no. 2 (2012).
21 Maurizio Lazzarato, “Immaterial Labor”; Christian Marazzi, The Violence of Financial Capitalism  (Los 
Angeles, CA: Semiotext(e), 2011).
22 As Terranova has argued “[n]urtured by the consumption of earlier cultural moments, subcultures have pro -
vided the look, style and sounds that sell clothes, CDs, video games, films and advertising slots on television.” 
Tiziana Terranova, Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age  (New York: Pluto Press, 2004), 80.
23 In his analysis of digital mashup cultures, Shiga gestures to some of ways in which the cachet of illegality 
or a certain DIY aesthetic produces a mark of distinction precisely through its performance of criticality 
and its seeming rejection of mass culture. Shiga, “Copy-and-Persist.”
24 Katie Allen, “GMT Google Seeks to Turn a Profit from YouTube Copyright Clashes,” theguardian.com, 
November 1, 2009, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/nov/01/google-youtube-monetise-
content; Shawn Hess “YouTube Strikes Deal to Monetize User Videos Featuring Copyrighted Material,” 
June 6, 2013, http://www.webpronews.com/youtube-strikes-deal-to-monetize-user-videos-featuring-cop -
yrighted-material-2012-06; Greg Sandoval, “YouTube’s Filters Help Copyright Owners Profit from Pirated 
Videos” August 7, 2013, http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-10027509-93.html.
25 Ashley Read, “An Introduction to how Remix Culture is Changing Marketing,” https://medium.com/
digital-advertising/a684801cd8a3.
26 As an illustration of good practice, Read describes the Old Spice Muscle Music campaign launched in 
August 2012. This features actor and NFL player Terry Crews wired to electrodes and playing a variety 
of musical instruments by flexing his muscles. The advertisement includes a video of the actor performing 
but also a recordable player that initiates after the video finishes and allows users to record their own 
music video by pressing different keys to animate Crews. The advertisement, at the time of this writing, 
has ten million views and 18,400 likes on the Vimeo platform. http://vimeo.com/47875656.
27 Ibid.
28 Jodi Dean, “Communicative Capitalism: Circulation and the Foreclosure of Politics.” Cultural Politics  1, 
no. 1 (2005): 51–74.
29 Ibid., 55.
30 Navas, Remix Theory , 73.
31 A portmanteau of hack and activism that describes the use of networked media in political intervention 
and social movements.
32 A term developed by Geert Lovink to designate forms of media activism by groups or individuals operat -
ing outside of positions of power that privilege temporary interventions and guerrilla media tactics.
33 Paolo Cirio and Alessandro Ludovico, Amazon Noir  (2006), http://www.amazon-noir.com/.
34 Paolo Cirio and Alessandro Ludovico,  Face-to-Facebook  (2011), http://www.face-to-facebook.net/.
35 Golan Levin, The Free Universal Construction Kit  (2012), http://fffff.at/free-universal-construction-kit/.
Bibliography
Allen, Katie. “GMT Google Seeks to Turn a Profit from YouTube Copyright Clashes.” theguardian.com . 
November 1, 2009, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/nov/01/google-youtube-
monetise-content (accessed May 3, 2014).
332
R. O’DWYERAshton, Kevin. “You Didn’t Make the Harlem Shake Go Viral—Corporations Did” March 28, 2013, http://
qz.com/67991/you-didnt-make-the-harlem-shake-go-viral-corporations-did/ (accessed August 12, 2014).
Bar, Francois, Walter Baer, Sharham Ghanderharizadeh, and Fernando Ordonez. “Infrastructure: 
Network Neutrality and Network Futures.” In Networked Publics  edited by Kazys Varnelis, 109–144. 
London: MIT Press, 2008.
Bauwens, Michel. “The Political Economy of Peer Production.” CTheory  no. 1 (2005).
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Boyle, James. “The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public Domain.” Law 
and Contemporary Problems  66, no. 1/2 (2003): 33–74.
Cirio, Paolo, and Alessandro Ludovico, Amazon Noir. 2006. http://www.amazon-noir.com/ (accessed 
May 3, 2014).
——. Face-to-Facebook . 2011. http://www.face-to-facebook.net/ (accessed May 3, 2014).
Dean, Jodi, “Communicative Capitalism: Circulation and the Foreclosure of Politics.” Cultural Politics  
1, no. 1 (2005): 51–74.
Doctorow, Cory. Pirate Cinema . CorDoc-Co, Ltd (UK), 2012.
Edwards, Richard L., and Chuck Tryon. “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen 
Empowerment” First Monday  14, no. 10 (2009) http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/2617/2305  (accessed May 3 2014).
Habermas, Jürgen. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of 
Bourgeois Society . London: MIT Press, 1991.
Hess, Shawn “YouTube Strikes Deal to Monetize User Videos Featuring Copyrighted Material.” June 
6, 2013, http://www.webpronews.com/youtube-strikes-deal-to-monetize-user-videos-featuring-
copyrighted-material-2012-06 (accessed May 3, 2014).
Jenkins, Henry. “Multiculturalism, Appropriation, and the New Media Literacies: Remixing Moby 
Dick.” In Mashup Cultures  edited by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 98–119. New York: Springer, 2010.
Lazzarato, Maurizio. “Immaterial Labor.” In Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics  edited by Paolo 
Virno and Michael Hardy (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1996): 133–147.
Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and 
Control Creativity . London: Penguin, 2004.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . London: Penguin, 2008.
Levin, Golan, The Free Universal Construction Kit . 2012. http://fffff.at/free-universal-construction-kit/ 
(accessed May 3, 2014).
Marazzi, Christian. The Violence of Financial Capitalism . Los Angeles, CA: Semiotext(e) (2011).
McCormack, David “Harlem Shake DJ Baauer Made NOTHING from Global Hit Due to Legal 
Loophole.” Daily Mail , August 20, 2013.
Moulier Boutang, Yann. Cognitive Capitalism . Cambridge: Polity, 2012.
Navas, Eduardo. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” In Mashup Cultures  edited 
by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 157–177. New York: Springer, 2010.
——. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
Notte, Jason. “Harlem Shake Was One Big Google Commercial,” April 1, 2013, http://money.msn.
com/now/post.aspx?post=f60d7312-f99d-4ab8-ba55-a9723ad8f69e (accessed May 3, 2014).
Peterson, Kim. “How Harlem Shake Became a no. 1 song” February 2, 2013, http://money.msn.com/
now/how-harlem-shake-became-a-no-1-song (accessed May 3, 2014).
Read, Ashley. “An Introduction to How Remix Culture is Changing Marketing.” https://medium.com/
digital-advertising/a684801cd8a3 (accessed May 18, 2014).
Sandoval, Greg. “YouTube’s Filters Help Copyright Owners Profit from Pirated Videos” August 7, 2013, 
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-10027509-93.html (accessed May 3, 2014).
Shiga, John. “Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-Up Culture.” Critical Studies in Media Communication  
24, no. 2 (2007): 93–114.
Terranova, Tiziana. Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age . New York: Pluto Press, 2004.
Žižek, Slavoj. “The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie.” London Review of Books  34, no. 2 (2012): 9–10.
33324
REMIX PRACTICES  
AND ACTIVISM
A Semiotic Analysis  
of Creative Dissent
Paolo Peverini
Even though remix practices are a very complex phenomenon and their impact on 
media genres and audiences is undeniable, it is only recently that scholars tried to legiti -
mate transformative works as a serious area of study. In this chapter I focus on remixes 
intended as texts, privileging a semiotic approach. In particular I argue that the analysis 
of sign processes and systems of communication is very useful, both on a theoretical and 
on a methodological level, to deepen comprehension of hybrid texts.
The chapter concentrates on audiovisual remixes, precisely on tactics and strategies 
planned by activists to involve public opinion with respect to issues like environmental 
protection or freedom of expression.
The hypothesis is that the effectiveness of some of the most radical and innovative 
creative protests is based on the ability to recognize and manage remixes intended as 
techno-political tools, even though in digital media the most original campaigns are 
rapidly assimilated by unconventional marketing strategies, triggering a process of pro -
gressive standardization. Through the analysis of some exemplary campaigns planned by 
Greenpeace and Wikileaks I aim to demonstrate that an emerging trend consists in a 
gradual stratification of texts used to address the receivers. The aim is to provoke a reac -
tion while entertaining the audience, remixing in an ironic way consists of various 
intertextual and interdiscursive references.
The first part of the chapter delves into the matter of a semiotics of remix, the second 
section focuses on its use in subversive advertisement, typical of culture jamming, and 
the conclusion examines how activists combine remix with camouflage tactics conceal -
ing at first sight the very objective of their discourse and renegotiating the fiduciary 
contract with their audiences.
334
P . PEVERINIRemix: A Semiotic Phenomenon
Any articulate reflection on the rapid spreading  of remix and mashup practices in the 
context of digital media cannot but take into consideration the fact that these forms of 
rewriting are based on a semiotic logic performed with a combined set of actions consist -
ing of the selection, decomposition, hybridization, and rewriting of (pre)existing texts. 
In other words: actions based on a metalinguistic competence which permits the subject 
to produce signification repurposing preexisting meaning.
As Eduardo Navas affirms:
The remix is in the end a re-mix—that is, a rearrangement of something already 
recognizable; it functions on a meta-level. This implies that the originality of 
the remix is non-existent; therefore it must acknowledge its source of validation 
self-reflexively. The remix when extended as a cultural practice, as a form of 
discourse, is a second mix of something pre-existent. The material that is mixed 
at least for a second time must be recognized, otherwise it could be misunder -
stood as something new and it would become plagiarism.1
Significantly, one of the distinctive features of any remix, here understood as being a 
composite set of semiotic practices, is that it goes beyond the borders of any particular 
discourse genre, avoiding any attempt to construct effective and exhaustive taxonomies. 
From this point of view, the expressive potential of remix should instead be set within 
the context of a more general theory of culture, since any work involving the manipula -
tion of preexisting texts is always based on the selection and reelaboration of “pre -
stressed blocks of meaning,”2 cultural resources on which the enunciative praxis of a 
“bricoleur” subject is concentrated. As Jean Marie Floch stated:
As with other enunciative practices, bricolage means calling upon a number of 
already established forms. However, the enunciative activity involved in brico -
lage does not lead to the production of merely stereotyped discourse. Rather, in 
this case, the selection and exploitation of the facts of usage and the products 
of history lead to a kind of creativity that constitutes the originality of bricolage 
as an enunciative praxis. We can, in fact, think of this as a double creativity. 
For, on the one hand, bricolage leads to statements that qualify as independent 
entities; while, on the other hand, any such statement will give substance, and 
hence identity, to an enunciating subject.3
From the perspective of a semiotic theory of culture, texts are not to be intended as 
isolated entities; on the contrary, their identity is constantly renegotiated, due to the 
endless translation with other texts that are connected with them: new texts assimi -
late them or rework the initial structure, in a process of hybridization and reworking 
that foster cross-cultural connections. Following this train of thought, the manifold 
practices and forms of the remix are not merely a “surface phenomenon” of cultures, 
but should be gauged within the set of all logics of translation between texts that fuel 
the “life cycle” of a culture. In other words, as remix practices and forms spread, they 
produce an impact on transformations that guarantee the functioning of the so-called 
semiosphere.4
As Nicola Dusi remarks,
335
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMin the production of culture, all texts are supported by something else; they are 
produced, distributed, and absorbed, circulating in a culture always alongside 
other products, other texts that receive them, associate with them, use them, 
cite them, and contaminate them. We agree with the anthropologist James 
Clifford, who claims that “the pure products go crazy” (Clifford, 1998). A 
swarm of texts, or rather, a web of references in endless translation with one 
another. As Yuri Lotman (1984) would argue, translation constructs and at the 
same time dynamizes cultural universes.5
The effectiveness of any form of remix does not stem merely from the skill used in select -
ing a set of cultural resources on the paradigmatic plane and then recombining them in 
a relatively original and creative fashion on the syntagmatic plane. This kind of enun -
ciative praxis is instead based on the enunciator’s strategic capacity to recognize and 
handle the know-how possessed by the interlocutor, in other words planning his/her 
moves according to the interpretative competences of the receiver.
Given that this peculiar form of metatext is marked by the presence of a strategic 
rationality that can contribute to renegotiating the interaction between the subjects 
participating in a discourse, at the same time soliciting their critical sensibility, remix 
proves to be one of the practices best suited to political protest.
Remix as a Form of Creative Political Protest
Remix can be conceived as a political act in itself: This is more relevant from a semiotic 
perspective, because whenever a text is sampled, its meaning is always renegotiated and 
reopened. Patently political remix videos gradually emerge as a popular genre of media 
texts characterized by some specific elements.6 Transformative works use preexisting 
audiovisual source texts, privileging pop culture materials (music videos, trailers,  
commercials, news fragments) and ignoring copyright laws. The reworking practices 
appropriate content, reopen their structure, commenting on narratives, ideological 
assumptions, and stereotypes with the aim of criticizing and/or highlighting original 
meanings. These works are DIY materials and since 2005 their massive circulation 
increasingly relies on video-sharing websites such as YouTube.
Undeniably, the ambit of political debate is therefore one of the discursive areas that 
is most congenial to forms of remix, as evidenced by the steadily increasing number of 
videos created with this technique for a variety of distinct subjects: citizens, political 
parties, associations, nongovernmental organizations, and the nonprofit sector in 
general.
With reference to the transformations that involve activist practices in the social 
media scenario, DIY remixes can be used to increase civic engagement or to motivate 
participation in political debates and decisions providing subjects with very limited 
financial resources an alternative mean to reach wide audiences.
From this point of view, the growing popularity of remix practices cannot but be seen 
in relation to the increasingly marked interconnection between media convergence, 
digital networking, and the emergence of a sociosemiotic logic, defined by Richard L. 
Edwards and Chuck Tryon7 as “critical digital intertextuality,” which typifies the use of 
remix as one of the most effective techno-political tools of protest. In other words: as 
one of the most popular methods of media activism.
336
P . PEVERINIHowever, one of the consequences of the growing diffusion and sharing of remix forms 
in the digital media scenario is a rapid process of standardization that affects not only 
the choice of materials to be remixed but also the sequences of combinations which, as 
a whole, form the text’s structure. What we see, therefore, is the emergence of a progres -
sive codification of remixes, where the protest gradually loses its meaning, a process that 
is linked to the operating logics of participatory cultures.
This is why, in the most interesting cases, the potentially most effective forms of pro -
test start with a general rethinking process about how the remix itself works, with the 
aim of fine-tuning texts that are increasingly stratified, complex, rich in references to 
other texts and discourses designed to solicit, ever more intensely, the competence of 
the receiver.
As mentioned previously, when tackling the theme of using remix as a communica -
tive form of protest, we refer almost exclusively to the scenario of user-generated con -
tent, which is undoubtedly extremely wide-ranging and in constant evolution, yet we 
fail to consider that there are myriads of subjects of enunciation committed to shaping 
the discourse of dissent, and that the goals they set themselves are extremely 
diversified.
In this sense, it should be noted how, over the past few years, an increasing number 
of social guerrilla campaigns, planned by the most well-known international nonprofit 
organizations, have focused on remix and mashup practices, with the aim of experiment -
ing with new expressive solutions, designed to attract a public that is increasingly used 
to the explicit portrayal of pain.8
The most innovative forms of campaign by nonprofit organizations are characterized 
by constant research on new remix practices that will affect the audience, aiming to 
stimulate engagement with the social cause.
Disruptive media actions such as those organized by the Adbusters collective or the 
Billboard Liberation Front have been progressively reproduced and used for various goals 
by the same subjects who were initially targeted by the protest actions, and have now 
been largely assimilated into the repertoire of tactics and techniques that make up so-
called guerrilla marketing.
How do activists react to the fact that their own “weapons,” their guerrilla strategies, 
have become part of brand communication? Significantly, we are facing a progressive 
“aestheticization” of the protest, whose effectiveness relates to an enunciative praxis. 
Some of the most interesting social campaigns aim to solicit public opinion by shifting 
from the “transparency” of the content plane to the display of a fictitious metadiscourse 
based on heterogeneous processes of recombination and recomposition, on complex 
intrasemiotic and intersemiotic operations.
In other words, the semiotics of creative dissent is increasingly based on remix 
intended as a discursive practice or, more precisely, a political discourse. In any case, the 
effectiveness of the most provocative protest cannot be conceived of as simply a matter 
of creative and heterogeneous techniques but, on the contrary, its effectiveness is based 
on a subtle strategic competence that consists of first detecting characteristic features in 
the discourses made by activists, so as then to plan alternative and unpredictable com -
municative actions. Activists display the setup of their discourse, the stratification of 
their provocative protest, pointing out, in other words, the opacity of the meaning 
displayed.
To strengthen the message, three very common discursive strategies in civic media 
(warning, suggestion, and condemnation) are being continually redefined using irony  
337
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMand paradoxes , often sparking passionate public debate about the ethics of portraying a 
serious situation in a humorous manner. In the most relevant examples, the impact of 
an innovative protest is based on a metadiscursive approach to dissent, tending to reo -
pen texts, manipulate signification processes, “inoculate” paradoxes within the original 
message. In other words, the effectiveness of such protests depends on the ability shown 
by an enunciator in distorting the semantic coherence of some preexisting materials, 
that are often, as we will see, very distant from the discursive genre of dissent.
Activists try to bypass the indifference of audiences by moving beyond the idea that 
exhibiting the realistic effects of an emergency is enough to obtain the attention of 
public opinion. Some signs of a significant variation in the semiotics of dissent are 
therefore gradually emerging: the explication of the subject of enunciation becomes 
increasingly relevant. As a result, the strategic enunciative contract between activists 
and their followers takes on new forms and the soundness of the protest is often staged 
through a professedly fictional mise-en-scène .
The activists’ denouncement is expected to be more incisive, more apparently incon -
gruous, stratified, oblique. Accordingly, whereas the effectiveness of nonprofit organiza -
tions’ most innovative campaigns relies on the ability to avoid some narrative rules and 
stereotypes regarding the representation of dramatic issues, with regard to mechanisms 
that reveal the enunciation process within the text, the strategy consists of using remix 
practices to enhance the reflexive opacity more than the transparency of texts .9
Activists increasingly resort to complex resemantization practices, in order to reiter -
ate the transparency and soundness of their denouncement. The strategic use of remix 
therefore consists of planning targeted use of intertextuality and interdiscursivity, at first 
sight camouflaging the true semiotic nature of the protest campaign, with the aim of 
bypassing the public’s inurement to the canonical forms of political discourse. Social 
guerrilla action often develops in this way, starting from a two-fold operation entailing 
selection-simulation of features that are characteristic to commercials, amateur user-
generated content and social networking platforms. With the aim of soliciting public 
support for issues such as environmental protection, (abolition of) the death penalty, or 
the rights of children, the practice of remix is used in numerous campaigns to make the 
protest message even more effective when it is based on the veridictive logic of secrecy , 
defined by Greimas and Courtés10 as a combination of being + not-seeming.
Further expanding the perspective of the analysis, the frequent use of remix in inno -
vative forms of media activism is made even more meaningful by the fact that the 
potential for social criticism which typifies this kind of rewriting is often expressed in a 
playful way. In particular, when planning increasingly stratified forms of dissent that are, 
at the same time, expressed through a variety of media, the protest takes on the guise of 
entertainment , a reworking of texts that aim to amuse the receiver and, at the same time, 
provoke a reaction on a cognitive, passional, and pragmatic plane.
The Entertaining Use of Political Remix Videos
From this point of view, one of the names in activism that stands out for its ability to 
plan, prepare, and manage communicative protest actions that successfully arouse the 
interest of the media is certainly Greenpeace. Their social guerrilla campaign against 
Volkswagen, accused of promoting their commitment to environmental protection 
(greenwashing) in a misleading way, is characterized by an exemplary use of remix, 
explicitly intended as a political tool. The disruptive action effected by this 
338
P . PEVERINIenvironmental movement was conceived as a refined, intertextual, and intermedial 
strategy, using as its starting point the official commercial produced by Volkswagen for 
the market launch of the Passat, consisting of an advertising campaign entitled “The 
Force,” likewise based on a series of quotations from the cult sci-fi saga: Star Wars .
The Greenpeace narrative reverses the communicative strategies of the adversary 
(VW) in a stratified metastrategy that applies forms of reworking, typical of fandom 
communities.11 In a subvertising campaign,12 eco-activists on the VWdarkside.com web -
site compared the German automaker’s logo to the Death Star, transforming the famous 
pay off “Das Auto” with “Dark Side” while reserving the role of Rebel Alliance for 
themselves.
Greenpeace’s strategy is based on a complex metacommunication project, which con -
sists of a website, two Web videos, and some guerrilla actions staged in London and 
Brussels. In this true masking strategy, the videos created by Greenpeace for the Web are 
particularly interesting because simulating typical features of amateur films self-produced 
by the fans of that science fiction saga (user-generated content) are used to rewrite the 
ending of Volkswagen’s official commercial. In the videos,13 the role of defenders of 
nature is entrusted to children wearing the masks and costumes of the main Star Wars ’ 
characters and, by defeating the fake Darth Vader, the protagonist of VW’s advertising 
campaign, they convince the automobile giant to abandon the dark sides of force and 
wed the cause of ecology. The unconventionality of the discourse about nature consists 
here in shifting the conflict between proponents and detractors of the social cause onto 
an explicitly fictional level. By keeping the soundtrack from the original motion picture 
in the parody video, eco-activists demonstrate the stratification of their discourse, 
thereby indicating the intricacy of the meaning displayed.
The remarkable diffusion obtained by these videos is therefore based on the skill 
shown by a subject of enunciation (the nongovernmental organization) in recognizing 
the polemic potential of forms of rewriting, collocating the discourse according to a 
media scenario that is increasingly typified by a proliferation of complex intertextual 
references. In other words, the strategic competence that initially guides this kind of 
communicative action is based on the idea that remix is not merely a phenomenon 
found on the edges of a culture, intended as a semiotic space,14 but rather testifies to the 
Figure 24.1   “VW: The Dark Side,” Greenpeace (courtesy of http://youtu.be/
nXndQuvOacU)
339
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMfact that social circulation of any text whatsoever within a culture is fueled by constant 
renegotiation of its borders.
The effectiveness of the most interesting rewriting actions, highly rewarded on the 
Web with massive diffusion (often superficially referred to as “viral”), is never actually 
achieved through indiscriminate deformation of a text, but rather by the ability to “read” 
its different levels, the internal links to the source story, which then subsequently creates 
a controlled transformation. In this sense, only the number and quality of a text’s rewrit -
ings, of its remakes, of its translations can testify to the rich significance of a text within 
a culture.
Expanding our horizons from the texts to the overall scenario of social media, an 
important aspect that should be highlighted concerns the correlation between the 
increasing use of remix as a playful protest tool and the practices of manipulating preex -
isting content (in most cases protected by copyright laws) that lie at the base of the 
growing phenomenon of user-generated content (UGC). In the UGC scenario, the 
enunciation process is never purely individual but always open, potentially collective, 
temporary, evolving.
The marked flexibility shown in forms of appropriation and reelaboration of con -
tent on the Web clearly reflects the dynamism typical of differing prosumer  figures in 
terms of skills and practices. Following this reflective train of thought, the actions of 
reopening and manipulating texts on the Internet that typify forms of remix (with 
particular reference to audiovisual language) escape all calculation or control, and, as 
far as enunciation is concerned, creative rewriting practices fuel a process whose 
boundaries are at the very least blurred. In this sense, playful forms of protest should 
always be analyzed from a diachronic standpoint, taking into consideration the 
entirety of the reactions that they fuel, all the communicative moves and counter -
moves that they contribute to trigger.
From this point of view, there is a particularly significant second stage in the planned 
strategy of dissent by Greenpeace activists against Volkswagen, following the 2012 pro -
motional campaign for the launch of the New Beetle (sequel of the 2010 commercial 
based on Star Wars ), entitled “The Dog Strikes Back: 2012 Volkswagen Game Day 
Commercial.” The countermove chosen by the environmental organization to denounce 
the carmaker’s boycott of European legislation on reducing CO2 levels in the atmos -
phere, consisted in its invitation to its supporters, and in general to fandom groups dedi -
cated to the science fiction saga, to unite in common protest against the German brand, 
using remixes and mashups as truly semiotic guerrilla tools.15 This represents a signifi -
cant shift in terms of planning forms of protest, since the principal organization for 
environmentalism on an international scale not only directly used forms of rewriting to 
deliver their political message, but also recognized the potential of creative consumer 
forms conceived by fans, inviting them to take part in a collective remix process that 
blatantly violated copyright laws. Furthermore, it is particularly relevant that Greenpeace 
did not stop merely at inviting and encouraging the creative reaction of fans, but also 
indicated how they could make the remix result even more visible (and so potentially 
more effective) on social networks, suggesting they tag videos with titles similar to that 
of Volkswagen’s official commercial, so as to optimize their content in Google’s search 
results.
The role of remixes as support tools for protest actions and, more generally, for raising 
public awareness emerges explicitly in the announcement posted on Greenpeace UK’s 
official blog:
340
P . PEVERINIVW has launched its latest advert ahead of the US Super Bowl this weekend.
The advert is a follow-up to last year’s Little Darth one which we lampooned to 
reveal the Dark Side of VW’s environmental claims. It still riffs on a Star Wars  
theme and throws in a cute dog for good measure, but is there any mention of 
supporting ambitious climate laws?
Any room for a mention of radical efficiency improvements across VW’s 
range? Or just generally living up to VW’s ambitious claims of being the green -
est car company on the planet?
Sadly not, but I think it’s a missed opportunity. The Super Bowl is one of the 
biggest television events in the world so why not use it to announce some brave 
green measures?
That got me thinking: how could this advert be changed to show the real VW? 
The one that’s lobbying against new laws to reduce emissions from vehicles in 
Europe. The one that won’t meet with our campaign team for a chat. How 
about improving VW’s advert? Download the video and give it a make-over. 
Then post it on our Facebook page. Drop in some new footage, add some sub -
titles, or revoice the guys propping up the cantina bar. Feel free to use clips from 
any Greenpeace films.16
As mentioned in the introduction, addressing the issue of the effectiveness of forms of 
remix on the pragmatic level, i.e., as communicative actions that can trigger real change 
in the political sphere, means first of all recognizing that the practice of so-called adbust -
ing has long spread far beyond the borders of protest discourse, to the point of being 
widely used by the very same corporations against which they were initially directed.
According to this viewpoint, the ongoing stratification of communicative protest action 
is a response (provisional since it is subject to the constant dialectic relationship between 
activists and corporations) to the rapid assimilation of remix practices, to the recourse by 
a growing number of people to the semiotic logic on which the effectiveness of any form 
of rewriting within the digital media landscape is based: critical digital intertextuality.
A prime case in demonstrating to what extent remixes have become an established 
practice, both in fine-tuning the most original forms of activism and in constructing a 
complex marketing strategy, is undoubtedly the “Dove Onslaught(er)” campaign,17 an 
exemplary action by Greenpeace, both in terms of the extraordinary interest aroused on 
the Web, and from the viewpoint of the pressure exerted against a corporation that had 
been committed to a vast program of corporate social responsibility for years.
In 2007, this well-known company, manufacturer of body care products, a brand of 
the Unilever group, launched an initiative dedicated to raising the awareness of con -
sumers (in particular women) to the issue of the repercussions on an ethical plane of 
stereotyped patterns of beauty promoted by the cosmetics industry: “Campaign for real 
beauty.”18 Significantly, the structure of the film created to spread Dove’s social message, 
which rapidly became one of the most successful on the Web, reproduced a consolidated 
form of enunciative bricolage typical of many DIY remixes, i.e., a recutting of preexist -
ing images taken from TV news programs, advertising, covers of fashion magazines, that 
was then backed by the soundtrack taken from a preexisting song (“La Breeze” by 
Simian) which here aimed to raise a point of view that was explicitly critical of the 
spectacularization of women’s bodies. Dove’s message of social denouncement was made 
explicit by contrasting the images of sleek bodies, shaped by cosmetic surgery, with the 
341
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMclose-up of a little girl coming out of school, accompanied by the campaign slogan: “Talk 
to your daughter before the beauty industry does” ( Figure 24.2 ).
In response to this initiative, Greenpeace planned a counterinformation campaign in 
2008 to denounce to the public (and particularly to consumers of Dove products) the respon -
sibilities of the Unilever Group, the largest global purchaser of palm oil, in the destruction 
of rainforests in southeast Asia. The video and the exposure initiative as a whole created one 
of the most successful cases for the environmental organization which, in just two weeks, 
thanks to huge support from tens of thousands of people who directly supported the cam -
paign by sending emails of protest directly to Unilever, forced the multinational to accept a 
moratorium on the indiscriminate exploitation of endangered ecosystems.
The strategy chosen to create the film clip (which obtained over a million views in only 
a few days, visibility far higher than Dove’s official commercial) combined spoof tactics 
with the practice of remix. The images of women’s bodies were replaced by a series of 
photographs and video excerpts that portrayed the destruction of Indonesian forests and 
the killing of endangered animals for commercial purposes. The same song chosen for the 
Dove campaign was kept as a soundtrack but the words were changed to explain the ecolo -
gist cause’s issue. The end result, produced by the band, Ohm Square, was therefore a 
“new” song called “There They Go” (referring to tree felling) and, at the same time, a 
parodic reference to Dove’s communicative work. The social guerrilla operation was then 
completed by maintaining and simultaneously manipulating the opening and closing 
sequences of the video, substituting the image of the girl leaving school with the face of a 
young Indonesian woman, on whose scared face the camera focuses for a few seconds, 
accompanied by the protest’s slogan: “98% of Indonesia’s lowland forest will be gone by 
the time Azizah is 25. Most is destroyed to make palm oil, which is used in Dove products. 
Talk to Dove before it’s too late” ( Figures 24.3  and 24.4).
Figure 24.2   “Dove Onslaught(er),” I, Greenpeace (courtesy of http://youtu.be/
odI7pQFyjso)
342
P . PEVERINIA last aspect that should be taken into consideration when analyzing the forms of 
political remix videos is that of the dialectical relationship established between the 
brands targeted by the protest and the logos that define the identity of the activists. The 
impact of the communicative attack never consists of merely deforming the hallmarks 
of a brand that is considered an “enemy” to their social cause. Increasingly, manipulation 
of the antagonist’s signs is in fact framed within a wider discourse, a narrative organized 
into a myriad distinctly separate yet simultaneously interconnected texts that greatly 
expand the boundaries of traditional forms of protest.
Figure 24.3   “Dove Onslaught(er),” II, Greenpeace (courtesy of http://youtu.be/
odI7pQFyjso)
Figure 24.4   “Dove Onslaught(er),” III, Greenpeace (courtesy of http://youtu.be/
odI7pQFyjso)
343
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMIn this sense, a particularly significant example was the social guerrilla campaign organ -
ized in 2011 by Wikileaks against Visa Europe, MasterCard, and American Express, which 
the previous year had blocked financial transactions in support of Julian Assange’s cause.19
The video, which was at the center of an immense protest action against the major 
international credit cards, not only manipulated the MasterCard logo, remixing it with 
the image of Earth, but then gradually made the logo disappear, as the “winning” brand, 
Wikileaks, steadily advanced. This subvertising operation actually proved to be even 
more refined, for MasterCard’s entire television advertising campaign was manipulated 
by using extremely precise camouflage, in which the soundtrack, the choice of shots, the 
photography, and the timbre of the narrator’s voice-off reproduced the style of the offi -
cial commercial in an absolutely believable way.
One can therefore see a further shift in the evolution of remix forms as tools of dissent. 
The polemic rewriting of texts not only deforms the narrative structure of adversaries’ 
materials or brands, but also faithfully reproduces the overall style of their discourse. In 
this way, by assimilating the slick style of their opponent’s television campaign, activists 
denounce even more dramatically the artificiality of their adversary’s message and the 
soundness of their own protest.
In the professionalization of dissent, the practice of remix renews itself yet again by 
flaunting (with the sole aim of then overthrowing) the signs of that quintessential glossy 
discourse: advertising.
Conclusions
Even though the subversive use of remix is not a recent phenomenon, since its history 
is related to the very beginning of the moving picture, undoubtedly in the digital media 
composite milieu the ease of access to an unlimited archive of contents, combined with 
the more and more relevant role of postproduction tools in redefining the complex 
scenario of user-generated content, contribute to foster the popularity of this kind of 
media text and thereby the spreading of stratified hybridization processes.
An important parameter to keep in consideration in studying forms of reappropriation 
concerns the planes of text involved in manipulations. The effectiveness of the most 
interesting rewriting forms is not built on an indiscriminate deformation of the source 
text, but on authors’ ability to select narrative, thematic, figurative, and enunciative 
elements that can be used to provoke a controlled audiovisual manipulation .
Hence, referring to the distinction between use and interpretation of texts,20 we must 
admit that these heterogeneous and subtle manipulation practices should not be simply 
and briefly described as mere recreational deconstruction of texts because, as many cases 
demonstrate, they rely on complex interpretive cooperation semiotic processes.
From this perspective, the growth of political remix videos represents a remarkable 
phenomenon since the effectiveness of these transformative works relies undeniably on 
the enunciator’s ability to address the audience, to select and manage the complex intri -
cacy of intertextual and interdiscursive references. In this very broad category some of 
the most innovative forms of remix regard the creative strategies planned by media 
activists involved in nonprofit sector.
If on one side remix proves to be one of the most common techno-political tools of 
protest, on the other, the life cycle of any successful campaign is constantly conditioned 
by the increasing number of variants conceived by competitors and, more generally, by 
the constant dialectic between cultural rebellion and corporate co-optation.
344
P . PEVERINITo contain the progressive standardization of remix practices, the most creative strate -
gies planned by activists consist in highlighting the stratification of the discourse, often 
resorting to camouflage tactics that emphasize the apparent extraneousness of the text 
to the political protest frame. Creative protest becomes a marketing weapon that fosters 
a sort of cultural loop, a battle between activists and brands where both sides compete 
and manipulate each other’s signs, tactics, and strategies.
Notes
 1 Eduardo Navas, “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture” in Mashup Cultures , ed. Stefan 
Sonvilla-Weiss (Wien: Springer, 2010), 161.
 2 Claude Lévi-Strauss, La Pensée Sauvage  (Paris: Plon, 1962).
 3 Jean Marie Floch, Visual Identities  (London: Continuum, 2000), 5.
 4 Yuri M. Lotman, Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture , trans. Ann Shukman (London: I. B. 
Tauris & Co Ltd, 1990).
 5 Nicola Dusi “Translating, Adapting, Transposing,” ASSA—Applied Semiotics, Sémiotique Appliquée , 24 
(2010): 82–83.
 6 See Jonathan McIntosh, “A History of Subversive Remix Video before YouTube: Thirty Political Video 
Mashups Made between World War II and 2005,” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (2012): 1–25.
 7 Richard L. Edwards and Chuck Tryon, “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen Empowerment,” 
First Monday  14 (2009): 1–11, http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2617/2305.
 8 See Luc Boltanski, La souffrance à distance: morale humanitaire, médias et politique  (Paris: Editions Métailié, 
1993); Susan Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Others  (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003).
 9 Louis Marin, De la représentation  (Paris: Seuil/Gallimard, 1994).
10 Algirdas Julien Greimas and Joseph Courtés, Sémiotique. Dictionnaire raisonné de la théorie du langage  (Paris: 
Hachette, 1979).
11 Henry Jenkins, Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory Culture  (New York: New York 
University Press, 2006).
12 Subvertising is a subversive advertisement common to culture jamming.
13 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eZ_vvDtv8lA (accessed May 3, 2014).
14 Lotman, Universe of the Mind .
15 Paolo Peverini, “Environmental Issues in Unconventional Social Advertising: Semiotic Perspective.” 
Semiotica: Journal of the International Association for Semiotic Studies , 199 (2014): 219–246.
16 “VW’s New Advert Misses a Trick, So Remix Your Own Version,” http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/blog/
climate/vws-new-advert-misses-trick-so-remix-your-own-version-20120202 (accessed May 3, 2014).
17 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HWaekMdpDDE (accessed May 3, 2014).
18 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ei6JvK0W60I (accessed May 3, 2014).
19 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jzMN2c24Y1s (accessed May 3, 2014).
20 Umberto Eco, The Limits of Interpretation  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990).
Bibliography
Boltanski, Luc. La souffrance à distance: morale humanitaire, médias et politique . Paris: Editions Métailié, 
1993.
Coppa, Francesca and Julie Levin Russo. “Fan/Remix video” special issue, Transformative Works and 
Cultures  (2012), doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0371 (accessed May 2, 2014).
Dusi, Nicola. “T ranslating, Adapting, Transposing.” ASSA—Applied Semiotics , Sémiotique Appliquée  24 
(2010): 82–83.
Dusi, Nicola, and Lucio Spaziante, eds. Remix-remake. Pratiche di replicabilità . Roma: Meltemi, 2006.
Eco, Umberto. The Limits of Interpretation . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Edwards, Richard L., and Chuck Tryon. “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen 
Empowerment.” First Monday  14 (2009): 1–11. http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
view/2617/2305 (accessed May 2, 2014).
345
REMIX PRACTICES AND ACTIVISMEugeni, Ruggero. Semiotica dei media. Le forme dell’esperienza . Rome: Carocci, 2010.
Floch, Jean-Marie. Visual Identities . London: Continuum, 2000.
Gramigna, Remo. “Between Cultural Studies and Semiotics of Culture: The Case of Culture Jamming.” 
Lexia. Rivista di semiotica  13/14 (2013): 61–99.
Greimas Algirdas Julien, and Joseph Courtés. Sémiotique. Dictionnaire raisonné de la théorie du langage . 
Paris: Hachette, 1979.
Jenkins, Henry. Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory Culture . New York, NY : New York 
University Press, 2006.
Lasn, Kalle. Culture Jam. How to Reverse America’s Suicidal Consumer Binge—And Why We Must . 
New York, NY: HarperCollins, 1999.
Lasn, Kalle, ed. Meme Wars. The creative destruction of neoclassical economics . New York, NY: Seven 
Stories Press, 2012.
Leone, Massimo, ed. “ Protesta /Protest.” Lexia. Rivista di semiotica  13/14 (2013).
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. La pensée sauvage . Paris: Plon, 1962.
Lotman, Yuri M. Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture . London: I. B. Tauris & Co Ltd, 
1990.
Marin, Louis. De la représentation . Paris: Seuil/Gallimard, 1994.
McIntosh, Jonathan. “A History of Subversive Remix Video before YouTube: Thirty Political Video 
Mashups Made between World War II and 2005.” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (2012): 1–25 
doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0371.
Navas, Eduardo. “Regressive and Reflexive Mashups in Sampling Culture.” In Mashup Cultures , edited 
by Stefan Sonvilla-Weiss, 157–177. Wien: Springer, 2010.
Peverini, Paolo “ La manipolazione filmica come consumo creativo. Soggetti, pratiche, testi .” In Open 
Cinema: Scenari di visione cinematografica negli anni ’10 , edited by Emiliana De Blasio and Paolo 
Peverini, 17–71. Roma: Edizioni Fondazione Ente dello Spettacolo , 2010.
——. “Eco-Images and Environmental Activism: A Sociosemiotic Analysis,” in “Eco-Images. 
Historical views and political strategies,” edited by Gisela Parak, special issue, Rachel Carson Center 
Perspectives  1 (2013): 73–85.
——. “Environmental Issues in Unconventional Social Advertising: A Semiotic Perspective.” 
Semiotica: Journal of the International Association for Semiotic Studies  199 (2014): 219–246.
Pezzini, Isabella and Veruska Sabucco. “ Praticare il testo. Oltre l’interpretazione, gli usi .” In Forme della 
testualità. Teorie, modelli, storia e prospettive , edited by Paolo Bertetti and Giovanni Manetti,  
331–343. Torino: Testo & Immagine, 2001.
Smith, Iain R. ed. “Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Reworking, Transformation” special issue and 
e-book, Scope (2009), https://www.academia.edu/207383/Cultural_Borrowings_Appropriation_
Reworking_Transformation (accessed May 2, 2014).
Sontag, Susan. Regarding the Pain of Others . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003.
Tryon, Chuck “Pop Politics: Online Parody Videos, Intertextuality, and Political Participation.” 
Popular Communication : The International Journal of Media and Culture  6 (2008): 209–213.
34625
POLITICAL REMIX  
VIDEO AS A 
VERNACULAR 
DISCOURSE
Olivia Conti
Remix processes in the contemporary media environment are responsible for objects of 
tremendous entertainment, aesthetic, and cultural value. Video remix, in particular, 
ranges from surrealist absurdity to sharp cultural critique, working with the ever-  
malleable materials of video, sound, and text to craft nuanced messages. Within the 
spectrum of video remix, political remix video (PRV) stands out for a number of reasons. 
PRV is: “a genre of transformative DIY media production whereby creators critique power 
structures, deconstruct social myths and challenge dominate [ sic] media messages through 
re-cutting and re-framing fragments of mainstream media and the popular culture.”1
In presenting explicitly political messages using solely bits of dominant mainstream 
discourse, the form is as fraught as it is full of subversive potential. It is this tension 
within the form that I will explore in this chapter. According to the Political Remix Video  
blog, maintained by remixer Jonathan McIntosh (most well known for his “Buffy vs. 
Edward” remix as well as his Donald Duck and Glenn Beck remix, “Right Wing Radio 
Duck”)2 political remix videos have three common traits. First, they present political 
messages, a term used loosely to refer to all manner of cultural and social issues. Second, 
they are guerilla insofar as the material that they use is copyright-protected. Third, they 
“utilize and embrace dominant media forms,” meaning that they make use of the formal 
characteristics of their sources.3 Through this process of reworking the familiar images 
and sounds of the media landscape, PRV encourages viewers to interrogate dominant 
ideologies.
While many previous discussions of remix have classified it in relation to art or music, 
some recent studies have focused on remix as an argument.4 Continuing in this vein, my 
goal in this chapter is to describe the ways in which PRV functions discursively. I argue 
that political remix represents a vernacular discourse that affirms marginalized commu -
nities by calling up and subverting institutional texts. Ono and Sloop define vernacular 
discourses as those that “ emerge from discussions between members of self-identified 
smaller communities within the larger civic community.”5 In remixing institutional texts 
in ways that resonate with these vernacular communities, PRV creators have the 
347
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEpotential to affirm identity and strengthen community bonds. However, because the 
vernacular asserts itself both within and against the larger civic community, a continual 
oscillation between institutional and vernacular discourses is created, which produces 
tension within remix texts as well as at the sites of their reception.
In what follows, I first establish PRV as a vernacular discourse and then, through 
examples from the works of Elisa Kreisinger (with whom I worked during the summer of 
2011) and Corey Ogilvie, I illustrate how PRV affirms vernacular community through 
the deployment of institutional source texts. I then analyze more deeply the remixes 
themselves to illustrate the points of friction between PRV’s source material and its 
constructed messages. In so doing, I hope to illustrate how remix, by calling upon ideo -
logically fraught sources for its arguments, represents a powerful site for critique and a 
site where rhetorical negotiation must be carefully undertaken.
Vernacular Discourse and its Relation to Political Remix Video
With the critical turn in rhetoric in the 1980s arose a desire on the part of scholars to 
focus not just on texts emanating from within cultural institutions, but rather on every -
day—vernacular—discourses. Focusing on the vernacular has allowed scholars to 
uncover and analyze the speech of localized and marginalized communities so often 
denied access to mainstream discursive avenues.6 The vernacular emerged as a rich point 
of study because it does not always maintain a consistent relationship to dominant dis -
course. Despite my emphasis on the vernacular, I think it serves digital scholars well to 
acknowledge that remix is such a deeply embedded cultural practice that there is cer -
tainly no definitive way to talk about it. Our understanding of remix is highly contex -
tual—we understand it within the framework of our knowledge of the source, our views 
on intellectual property and originality, and our own disciplines. Vernacular discourse, 
like all other critical lenses, has its limitations. However, I believe that it is one of many 
potentially fruitful angles from which scholars can approach remix as discourse.
Ono and Sloop’s framework for understanding vernacular discourse relies on two char -
acteristics: cultural syncretism and pastiche. Cultural syncretism describes the manner 
in which the vernacular “affirms cultural expressions while at the same time protesting 
against dominant cultural ideology.”7 This is accomplished through pastiche, the way in 
which institutional discourses are appropriated and recycled in order to affirm the local -
ized, community-based character of the vernacular. Ono and Sloop write that pastiche 
is embodied and ever-changing, “reconstituting discourses within specific racial, cul -
tural, gendered, and ethnic communities.”8 In this way, pastiche can also describe the 
remixing process. For example, Guo and Lee explore pastiche through Jason Wu, an 
Asian American video blogger who uses pop culture representations of Asian stereotypes 
to bolster his critiques.9 Appropriating these images affirms Wu’s audience and inspires 
critical reflection. Seen in this way, a critical consideration of remix as vernacular dis -
course must take into account the interplay between appropriated bits of mainstream 
discourse and the constructed messages of smaller, more localized communities.
As Ono and Sloop note, critical studies of the vernacular must attend to the inherent 
hybridity of the form, and attempt to destabilize essentialized representations of margin -
alized communities.10 Hybridity, reinvigorated by Homi Bhabha in the 1990s, is a useful, 
if complicated, analytical lens. Theories of hybridity can become locked into either 
pluralism or dualism, neither of which captures the essence of a truly hybrid form.11 In 
348
O. CONTIthe words of Guo and Lee, hybridity blurs and complicates rather than clarifies.12 With 
this in mind, interrogating the hybridity of online vernacular discourses is important. 
However, as Leonard has observed, viewing a discourse as solely hybrid risks destabilizing 
marginalized groups.13 As such, it is important to have a framework by which we may 
analyze vernacular discourses that takes their hybridity into account without relegating 
them to the realm of unknowable obscurity. Towards this end, Robert Glenn Howard 
has theorized a “dialectical vernacular” discourse that continually oscillates between 
top-down, mass-produced messages and grassroots, everyday discourses. The goal of this 
framework is not so much to create a new, third classification, but rather to acknowledge 
that discourse from within everyday communities must contain the institutional to 
establish its difference.14 In turn, discourse producers are constituted as hybrid agents, 
simultaneously invoking vernacular and institutional authority. This is especially appli -
cable to participatory media platforms such as Facebook, YouTube, and blogging plat -
forms (which actively encourage sharing, user interaction, and the creation of new con -
tent) in that users continually assert themselves both within everyday online communi -
ties through the work they create, but also as institutional agents due to their use of 
large, commercial sites. Considered alongside cultural syncretism and pastiche, the 
dialectical vernacular permits a deep exploration of hybridity in PRV .
An analysis of PRV also invites a consideration of art versus discourse, a tension 
that exists both in vernacular and remix scholarship. Ono and Sloop note that ver -
nacular discourse is both the speech resonating from and within localized communi -
ties, but also the culture of these communities, particularly, their artistic, musical, and 
architectural productions.15 Since these cultural productions are discursive in and of 
themselves, a broader theoretical lens can help locate the vernacular. Kuhn explores 
this in her article as well, noting that analyzing political remix as an argument occur -
ring across various registers (verbal, aural, and visual) requires a flexible theoretical 
focus.16 This rhetorical and discursive view of remix represents a departure from many 
prior studies which have attempted to classify remix with regard to particular sorts of 
cultural production. For example, Eli Horwatt placed PRV in a lineage alongside 
Situationist détournement  and other forms of culture jamming and appropriation art.17 
Similarly, Eduardo Navas defined contemporary remix practice as a historical trajec -
tory emanating from practices in music communities, dividing the types of remix into 
extended, selective, and reflexive. These first two types refer mostly to music, however 
a reflexive remix is that in which “the remixed version challenges the aura of the 
original and claims autonomy,” a designation applicable to video remixes including 
P RV.18 While these are useful classifications for studying remix, it seems that there is 
a need for more rhetorical scholarship on remix as discourse and argument. As Kuhn 
notes, an analysis of remix as argument provides greater opportunity to destabilize the 
amateur/professional boundary by analyzing aesthetically and technically sophisti -
cated videos that are constructed within (and often for) everyday communities, in 
order to express a desire for social change.19
Common to both vernacular discourse and remix is the necessity of a community 
affirmed by the reception of a mutually understood text. As Howard notes, the “celebra -
tory insertion” of vernacular discourse into the institutional is read as subversive because 
the viewing audience sees the vernacular as alternate from the institutional.20 In this 
way, the dialectical vernacular has the potential to affirm community identities and 
bonds and also to make a political argument. Similarly, Kuhn links the understanding 
349
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEof remix as a digital speech act to the affirmation of community, writing that “speech 
absolutely depends on a shared lexicon and the intent to communicate.”21 As such, 
remix emerges as a communicative form beyond entertainment or art—remix videos are 
often made for and within online communities, and communicated through a shared 
vocabulary. In recutting and reframing bits of this discourse—news broadcasts, popular 
television and radio programs, iconic cartoons and figures—remixers bolster their argu -
ments while simultaneously setting themselves apart from the dominant normative 
discourse.
The Vernacularity of Political Remix Video
Elisa Kreisinger’s Queer Carrie  remix series is a prominent example of the subversive 
potential of PRV , having been widely shared online and also explored by remix  
scholars. The project takes the form of three video remixes that invoke the formal quali -
ties of the Sex and the City  episode as well as the season preview, wherein narrative arcs 
are conveyed through quick cuts. The remixes recast the show’s protagonist, Carrie 
Bradshaw, as a queer woman navigating the vicissitudes of dating in New York. Alongside 
Carrie, friends Miranda, Samantha, and Charlotte 
have queer experiences of their own, from three -
somes to blind dates with women. Kreisinger 
crafts these narratives using a number of different 
techniques, including reediting voiceovers, 
removing heteronormative language, and recon -
textualizing homosocial utterances in order to enhance romantic storylines, all while 
retaining aspects of the original show such as the theme song and Carrie’s ubiquitous 
voiceovers.
The source, Sex and the City , is one of the most popular entertainment franchises 
in the United States, having received 50 Emmy nominations and inspired two fea -
ture films.22 After attracting initial acclaim for its willingness to tackle taboo issues 
and expose the “real world” of Manhattan dating, the series ended with all of  
the characters happily paired with members of the opposite sex, eliding any consid -
eration of the true diversity of sexual orientation. The show also celebrated  
conspicuous consumption, frequently featuring designers and highlighting charac -
ters’ consumer obsessions (Manolo Blahnik shoes, for instance).23 Sex and the City  
became established as institutional through both its status as an entertainment fran -
chise as well as its deployment of hegemonic Western ideals of consumerism and 
compulsory heterosexuality.
In contrast to its source, Queer Carrie  embodies the hybridity of vernacular discourse 
both in its message as well as its means of production. Far from creating a “third text” 
that is entirely outside of Sex and the City  or queer discourses, the remix calls up the 
source while simultaneously affirming a community that the original ignored and 
tokenized. Ono and Sloop note that vernacular discourse, via pastiche,
can combine elements of popular culture in such a way as to create a unique 
form that implicitly and often explicitly challenges mainstream discourse, while 
at the same time affirming and creating the community and culture that pro -
duce vernacular discourse.24See Chapter 37  for Elisa 
Kreisinger’s discussion on creat -
ing the remixes referenced here.
350
O. CONTINuanced use of pastiche such as Kreisinger’s does just this. The formal elements of the 
remix—the season preview format, the retention of Carrie’s voiceovers and the show 
theme song—illustrate the oscillation inherent in the dialectical vernacular, for these 
aspects of the original call to mind the institutional affiliation of the source while the 
narrative and argument affirm a queer viewing community. By mimicking the standard 
Sex and the City  format they call upon a community who have a familiarity with the 
source, while at the same time affirming queer and feminist viewers who objected to the 
original show’s erasures of various identities.
Another example of political remix video used to reach a vernacular community is 
Corey Ogilvie’s powerful Occupy Wall Street remix, I Am Not Moving . Ogilvie is a direc -
tor whose first feature length documentary, Think Peace: Portrait of a 21st Century 
Movement  debuted in 2008, and who has received Leo nominations for other documen -
taries and short films.25 I Am Not Moving  debuted on YouTube on October 11, 2011 and 
within a month had garnered over one million views.26 In this video, samples of addresses 
by President Barack Obama and then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on 2011’s Arab 
Spring revolutions are juxtaposed with street footage from protests in Libya, Egypt, and 
the Occupy Wall Street protests in New York City, as well as with historical footage from 
the civil rights movement. Overall, the juxtaposition of news footage with street footage 
in New York serves to highlight the perceived hypocrisy of the US government: while 
the footage of Obama and Clinton shows world leaders espousing the right of the people 
to peacefully protest their government and have a say in its policies, the footage from 
Occupy Wall Street shows ostensibly peaceful protesters at the mercy of armed police 
officers. In turn, the juxtaposition of protest footage from the Middle East with protest 
footage from New York shows striking similarities between a government derided by 
Obama for using “brutal suppression” and US law enforcement.
In juxtaposing these sources, Ogilvie makes a powerful argument about the US gov -
ernment and its perspective on dissent at home and abroad. In drawing parallels between 
the Occupy and Arab Spring protesters, the remix affirms Occupy Wall Street and its 
supporters—a large vernacular collective. Additionally, those who disagree with the 
remix are positioned as very much other-than the community it speaks to, even on the 
level of the title: I am not moving (a quote from one of the protesters), which encour -
ages viewers to identify with the vernacular “I” or the institutional “you.” I Am Not 
Moving  also serves to highlight the versatility of the remix argument. As Kuhn writes, 
remix has the ability to “subvert the dominant discursive field and its reified genres: 
Hollywood film, broadcast television, documentary, journalism, ethnography. Remix lays 
bare the constructed nature of the original and often calls attention to its own construc -
tion.”27 The juxtaposition of widely broadcast addresses made both by contemporary polit -
ical figures as well as historical civil rights heroes such as Martin Luther King Jr.  
with user-shot video of police brutality calls attention to the ways in which protest is 
reconfigured in the news cycle and throughout history to suit various political agendas 
and narratives. The shots from Egypt and Libya are not, on their surface, all too different 
from the shots from New York, yet the way they were translated for the deeply institu -
tional venues of the political speech and the news broadcast express vastly different 
views of the two protests. Thus, the remix simultaneously proffers a critical view of US 
government and news media, while also elevating the Occupy Wall Street protests to 
the level of the Arab Spring revolutions through juxtaposition. While this claim may 
seem dubious to some, there is no doubt that Ogilvie’s argument powerfully affirms the 
Occupy Wall Street collective and sharply critiques US policy.
351
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEWith these examples in mind, it’s clear that PRV can be held as an example of online 
vernacular discourse. In constructing arguments from preexisting texts (and the ideolo -
gies attending such texts), remixers call upon viewers to recognize their own vernacular 
community and to interrogate the primacy of hegemonic discourses. This mode of argu -
ment constitutes the remix as both a rhetorical and a vernacular text, for it makes an 
argument that resonates with its intended other-than-institutional audience. However, 
institutional sources are a volatile substance, arriving to the viewer rife with associations 
and affiliations. A skillfully executed remix, witnessed by its intended audience, will 
likely be well received. However, given the ease with which remix videos are published 
and shared, as well as the delicate work of constructing an argument from preexisting 
texts, the impact of a remix cannot always be predicted.
The Frictions of Vernacular Remix
In this section, I will discuss the areas of friction that remix causes and encounters 
online. Ono and Sloop note that it is essential to any critical consideration of the  
vernacular that we do not require it to always be counterhegemonic, for “even if the 
vernacular is concerned with local conditions these concerns can at times be more 
hegemonic than not.”28 When applied to Internet discourse, these “local conditions” 
expand outward to include vast, institutionalized practices, the types of prejudice that 
are woven into the fabric of everyday life and encoded into source texts used by remix -
ers. My primary concern is that occasionally these discourses “tag along” with remixed 
source footage, meaning that, regardless of a remixer’s intent to argue, their remixes can 
be read as implicitly or explicitly institutional. Here, there also exists a second issue 
regarding vernacular expressions online: the “spreadability” of online video in combina -
tion with participatory media such as YouTube, social media sites, and blogs. 
“Spreadability,” coined by Henry Jenkins, refers to “the potential—both technical and 
cultural—for audiences to share content for their own purposes.”29 The permeable 
boundaries between communities and the spreadability of vernacular expressions 
actively challenge the notion of online “localization” and often lead to remixes being 
misunderstood. Beyond these tensions, questions also persist about remix as art given 
the professional and polished nature of many popular remixes.
One of the most interesting facets of Kreisinger’s Queer Carrie is that it stays themati -
cally consistent with its source—it is about women consumed by their romantic rela -
tionships and their consumer obsessions. This simultaneously contributes to the remix’s 
vernacular nature, for it is what makes the queer narrative stand out, but it also rearticu -
lates problematic values that are inseparable from the source itself. For instance, in one 
episode, Carrie’s jealousy and insecurity about her ex-boyfriend’s new partner (Natasha) 
are transformed, via remix, into romantic jitters. Carrie is shown having lunch with 
Charlotte and discussing the outfit that she plans to wear to an upcoming event where 
Natasha will be in attendance. She describes how her “Natasha-specific obsession” will 
be put to rest once she is seen in a pair of recently purchased shoes and a dress that will 
cost her a month’s rent.30 Charlotte’s response to this is a reassurance that Carrie is 
“stunning” and “intelligent” and that she will impress Natasha regardless of what she 
wears.31 While the situation is recontextualized to describe Carrie’s complicated feelings 
about a romantic relationship with Natasha, the show’s consumer values and romantic 
obsession are untouched—Carrie believes that her worth is conferred upon her by her 
choice of footwear rather than her qualities as a woman. Thus, Queer Carrie  still reflects 
352
O. CONTIthe original show’s problematic relations between gender, sexual desirability, and con -
spicuous consumption. Guo and Lee echo this concern when discussing Asian American 
video producers’ use of Asian stereotypes to produce a humorous response. While among 
their target audience (fellow Asians/Asian Americans) this may be read as humorous 
rather than offensive or alienating, Guo and Lee note that using these stereotypes even 
in a parodic manner risks perpetuating them.32 With this in mind, it is important to 
interrogate whether the reproduction of these consumer and romantic obsessions has 
the potential to perpetuate hegemonies that would be best deconstructed by other 
means.
This potential of remix to be read as unwittingly institutional also calls up questions 
of how it is read as it circulates throughout online venues. Virginia Kuhn emphasizes the 
importance of a “common lexicon” when she writes about her initial ambivalent 
response to Queer Carrie  and her process of attempting to better understand the remix. 
Kuhn’s initial impression resulted from the fact that the remixed characters only choose 
women after being disappointed by men, a retelling that reinforced gender inequality 
and heteronormativity.33 However, after discussing the remix with Kreisinger herself, 
Kuhn rewatched it, attending to the manner in which toxic homosocial competition 
and jealousy are transformed via remix into fulfilling same-sex relationships, ultimately 
concluding that her initial “flawed” reading was due to her expectation that the remix 
referred to life rather than to its source.34 It is worth noting that the average viewer is 
neither as charitable nor as proactive as Kuhn, a remix scholar who sought out the 
video’s creator to discuss the work. Thus, while its relation to the source may be read as 
ironic or subversive, the complex dissection of the argument’s many registers may not 
happen on first glance for many viewers. Indeed, as Kreisinger acknowledges, the more 
queer remixes are shared among general audiences, the greater the potential for them to 
be read incorrectly due to audiences’ lack of familiarity with the “discursive community” 
from which they arise.35 Yet, this spreadability is part and parcel of the current media 
environment, and an important factor in building community online.
Participatory media (blogs, social media, and so on) represent a complex site of nego -
tiation, for remixed texts, the sites on which they are shared, and to some extent the 
remixers themselves are tenuously balancing between vernacular and institutional, 
something acknowledged by Howard.36 As Howard writes, vernacular authority at these 
discursive nodes is “accessible to everyone through the webs of structured discourse.”37 
For instance, websites where Kreisinger’s remix videos are posted—their “web of struc -
tured discourse”—generally cater to at least one of her target audiences. Commenters 
representing this cross-section of the Internet appear across venues—members of the 
political remix video community, or figures in the feminist and queer blogospheres. 
However, given the complex relationships of each commenting agent, vernacular 
authority takes vastly different shapes at each discursive node in the network. While 
Kreisinger’s remixes are celebrated on her own website, on YouTube, and in original 
posts by other bloggers, as they move further and further away from this nucleus of 
familiarity—where viewers know what to expect and have a fairly comprehensive under -
standing of what political remix video is all about—the receptiveness of Kreisinger’s 
audience seems to decrease.
To be precise, the perceived decline in audience receptivity becomes apparent when 
we note that Kreisinger’s work rarely appears on her own blog or elsewhere without the 
inclusion of either an interview or a quote taken from her website about the mission of 
PRV . For this reason, her remixes rarely appear as “entertainment-only” texts, if such 
353
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEtexts can be said to exist. On her blog and also on YouTube, the commenters show a 
willingness to engage with Kreisinger on PRV as well as her intended argument, asking 
questions and posting their own thoughts. On YouTube, many users expressed their 
admiration for the remix and their desire for more queer storylines, though a number of 
comments also focused on the attractiveness of the same-sex pairings (this unprece -
dented level of civility could be due to the fact that Kreisinger admits to deleting offen -
sive comments).38 However, when Queer Men  (a queer remix of Mad Men ) appeared on 
feminist blog Jezebel  and The Atlantic ’s entertainment section, each alongside interviews 
with or statements by Kreisinger, it met with some resistance from the commenting 
bodies at each site, despite being well contextualized within PRV as a whole. Jezebel  
users (again) focused on the hotness of the Don and Roger pairing and generally did not 
engage with Kreisinger’s goals for the remix, though some made critical comments about 
her artist statement, for instance criticizing her use of the word “patriarchy” rather than 
“status quo.”39 Users on The Atlantic  entertainment website mostly poked fun at the idea 
of a remix, suggesting, for instance, queering the 700 Club  or saying that “with enough 
footage, you can make 3 minutes of anything.”40 Almost no user comments (on both 
websites) responded to the argument of the remix or any of Kreisinger’s statements 
regarding her work.
These differing responses seem to relate to differing communicative expectations. As 
Kuhn notes, a speech act depends on a “shared lexicon and intent to communicate,” and 
a remix’s criticality should be judged by its “participation in a discourse community.”41 
While Kreisinger is positioned as a member of the communities where her work is 
posted—a feminist, an entertainment critic—the audiences at a number of these discur -
sive nodes challenge this vernacular authority. Additionally, they do not seem to see the 
remix as a speech act but rather as an entertainment object, despite the fact that the 
original posts do deal with the remix as a political argument. In the case of The Atlantic , 
Kreisinger’s remix seems to disrupt some sort of expected norm, perhaps due to the 
YouTube video being foregrounded in the post (which may signal frivolity or entertain -
ment) or the fact that it was included in the site’s “entertainment” section. In the case 
of Jezebel , the remix is misunderstood as an entertainment object or challenged outright 
due to Kreisinger’s failure to use the desired vocabulary (“patriarchy” versus “status 
quo”). When the videos are embedded in locations that have different expectations for 
communication than Kreisinger’s more immediate circle, the remixes do not show any 
sort of community resonance. This reception across discursive nodes extends notions of 
the dialectical vernacular because the vernacular expression does not change (i.e., the 
video remains the same), but the community that it evokes (or fails to evoke) takes a 
different form wherever the video is shared. Thus, even though the audience may be 
familiar with the original show, they fail to see the remix as an argument due to the 
context in which it is placed.
Professional remix techniques are another contested issue raised by some PRV . 
Remixes like Kreisinger’s and Ogilvie’s, as well as many other celebrated remixes like 
Jonathan McIntosh’s “Right Wing Radio Duck” or Diran Lyons’s “99 Problems,” exhibit 
a tremendous degree of technical skill, and in many cases these creators have credentials 
and experience in the realm of media production. Vernacular discourse, generally speak -
ing, refers to the everyday creations of communities. However, in the case of remix, a 
certain amount of creative and technical skill seems to be required to make a successful 
video. While there are many amateur remixes, the ones that generally end up achieving 
viral status demonstrate professional or quasi-professional levels of technological 
354
O. CONTIproficiency, as evidenced by the wide circulation of the above-mentioned videos. Eli 
Horwatt notes (of trailer remixing) that “a successful remix is predicated on a highly 
media literate creator who can deconstruct and recreate the nuances and technical 
devices employed by the film preview.”42 These media and technical literacies undoubt -
edly place the remixer in a relatively privileged position in comparison to many in their 
audience, who may not have the media awareness, time, or skills to create remixes 
themselves, though they may be able to recognize the cleverness of the remix. This, 
again, invokes a discussion of remix as art versus remix as argument. As Kuhn notes, 
understanding remix as art risks reinforcing the amateur/professional binary.43 While 
these two categories are by no means diametrically opposed, the frames of analysis and 
assessment for each are different. While this does not hinder the ability of remix to 
argue, I am concerned that the polish and professionalism of some largely successful 
remixes may potentially distance viewers, or further encourage the analysis of remix 
through artistic rather than rhetorical frameworks. In turn, this may weaken the remix’s 
ability to affirm vernacular communities by positioning the act of remixing as something 
outside of the capabilities of the viewer. Thus, while viewers may engage in discourse 
around  the video (by sharing and commenting) they may be less inclined to make their 
own remixes.
Given the immense variety of vernacular communities online and the tremendous 
mobility afforded vernacular expressions by networked technologies, there is no defini -
tive way to assess whether a particular PRV was received as intended. Indeed, it seems 
that the most likely answer is that a remix’s effect depends largely on its context. This 
reinforces preexisting notions of the vernacular in that the successful affirmation of a 
vernacular community takes place in certain localized areas (for instance, Kreisinger was 
best received on her own blog). These areas of friction also illustrate the nuances of 
hybridity, and do away with any notion of a hybrid as a third form by highlighting the 
continuing oscillation between vernacular, community-focused discourses and domi -
nant institutional ones. Both the online venue where a remix is placed as well as the 
viewer’s own perspective and understanding of the remix upon first viewing determine 
the manner in which it is interpreted. In looking at these areas of friction we can come 
to understand that any given PRV , while itself presenting a complex argument, is also 
necessarily involved in a give-and-take with its audience, its venue, and various other 
contextual factors. This demonstrates the importance of viewing remix with a critical 
eye both as scholars and as laypeople.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I’ve introduced the idea of PRV as a hybrid vernacular form, a notion 
that extends previous studies of the rhetoric of remix by situating PRV as an expression 
that evokes smaller, often marginalized groups of the larger civic community. This grants 
PRV tremendous potential to affirm community bonds, however as many vernacular 
scholars note, being vernacular does not immediately grant liberatory or counterhegem -
onic potential.44 Nonetheless, in remixing mainstream discourses, remixers offer sharp 
critiques of the world in which we live and draw their viewing communities together. I 
have also suggested that the spreadability of remix can present a challenge to notions of 
the vernacular due to the fact that different communities take shape wherever the remix 
is shared. In turn, I have posited that the reproduction of problematic discourses via 
remix may not always serve a subversive potential for this same reason.
355
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEPRV is a new media phenomenon that merits study from a variety of perspectives. It 
sits at the nexus of image, discourse, and technology, and it is this hybrid status that 
makes remix such a useful vehicle for expression and critique, but also what imbues it 
with tension. As a rhetorical scholar interested in remix as argument, I have been drawn 
to the vernacular as a lens through which to view remix because it highlights how remix 
functions, how it occasionally fails to function, and also where the vernacular lens itself 
fails. Understanding PRV as a vernacular discourse involves interrogating how remix 
serves to affirm marginalized communities, but also how it is forever hybrid, incorporat -
ing institutional texts into vernacular messages and broadcasting them (most often) in 
institutional venues. With this hybridity comes complication, for the institutional is 
saturated with hegemony and oppression, and so too is remix forever grappling with 
these issues.
Notes
 1 “About Political Remix Video,” Political Remix Video, http://www.politicalremixvideo.com/what-is-
political-remix/.
 2 Jonathan McIntosh, “Buffy vs. Edward: T wilight Remixed,” rebelliouspixels , http://www.rebelliouspixels.
com/2009/buffy-vs-edward-twilight-remixed; “Right Wing Radio Duck,” rebelliouspixels , http://www.rebel -
liouspixels.com/2010/right-wing-radio-duck-donald-discovers-glenn-beck.
 3 Ibid.
 4 Virginia Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (2012). doi:10.3983/
twc.2012.0358.
 5 Kent A. Ono and John M. Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” Communication Monographs  
62 (1995): 23.
 6 Ibid., 19.
 7 Ibid., 22.
 8 Ibid., 23.
 9 Lei Guo and Lorin Lee, “The Critique of YouTube-based Vernacular Discourse: A Case Study of YouTube’s 
Asian Community,” Critical Studies in Media Communication  30, no. 5 (2013): 10, doi:10.1080/1529503.
2012.755048.
10 Ono and Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” 34.
11 Marwan Kraidy, Hybridity, or the Cultural Logic of Globalization  (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University 
Press, 2005): 5.
12 Guo and Lee, “The Critique of YouTube-based Vernacular Discourse,” 5.
13 Philip Leonard, Nationality between Poststructuralism and Postcolonial Theory: A New Cosmopolitanism  
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005): 150.
14 Robert Glenn Howard, “Electronic Hybridity: The Persistent Processes of the Vernacular Web,” Journal 
of American Folklore  121 (2008): 204.
15 Ono and Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” 20.
16 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 1.5.
17 Eli Horwatt, “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing: Contemporary Found Footage Practice on the 
Internet,” Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Reworking, Transformation, Scope: An Online Journal of 
Film and Television Studies , http://www.scope.nottingham.ac.uk/cultborr/Cultural_Borrowings_Final.
pdf#page=88.
18 Eduardo Navas, “Remix Defined,” Remix Theory  (n.d.). http://remixtheory.net/?page_id=3.
19 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 1.7.
20 Howard, “Electronic Hybridity,” 205.
21 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 1.7.
22 “About The Show,” HBO, http://www.hbo.com/sex-and-the-city/index.html#/sex-and-the-city/about/
index.html.
23 Elisa Kreisinger, interview by Koa Beck, Daily Brink , http://www.dailybrink.com/?p=762.
24 Ono and Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” 23.
25 Corey Ogilvie, “About,” OgilvieFilm.com, http://www.ogilviefilm.com/about.html
356
O. CONTI26 Corey Ogilvie, “News,” OgilvieFilm.com, http://www.ogilviefilm.com/news.html
27 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 5.4.
28 Ono and Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” 34.
29 Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green, Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked 
Culture  (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2013): 3.
30 Elisa Kreisinger, Sex and the Remix (Queering Sex and the City) Season 2 , YouTube video, January 11, 2010, 
http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=JVWWQF2jcsg.
31 Elisa Kreisinger, Sex and the Remix (QueerCarrie Project: Queering Sex and the City) Seasons 3–6 , YouTube 
video, May 26, 2010, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1QfWRD7qfA.
32 Guo and Lee, “The Critique of YouTube-based Vernacular Discourse,”13.
33 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 4.4.
34 Ibid., 4.6.
35 Elisa Kreisinger, “Queer Video Remix and LGBTQ Online Communities,” Transformative Works and 
Cultures  9 (2012): 1.1.
36 Robert Glenn Howard, “The Vernacular Web of Participatory Media,” Critical Studies in Media 
Communication  25, no. 5 (2008): 497.
37 Ibid.
38 Elisa Kreisinger, e-mail message to author, April 9, 2012.
39 Dodai Stewart, “What if Don Draper Was Deeply in Love with Roger Sterling?” Jezebel. March 15, 2012. 
http://jezebel.com/5893622.
40 Kasia Cieplak-Mayr von Baldegg, “Sex, Lies, and Video Remixes: Critiquing ‘Mad Men’ in Its Own 
Words.” The Atlantic , March 22, 2012. http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/03/sex-
lies-and-video-remixes-critiquing-mad-men-in-its-own-words/254912/.
41 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 1.7.
42 Horwatt, “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing.”
43 Kuhn, “The Rhetoric of Remix,” 1.7.
44 Ono and Sloop, “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” 40.
Bibliography
“About Political Remix Video,” Political Remix Video , http://politicalremixvideo.net (accessed August 
13, 2014).
Cieplak-Mayr von Baldegg, Kasia. “Sex, Lies, and Video Remixes: Critiquing ‘Mad Men’ in Its Own 
Words.” The Atlantic . March 22, 2012. http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/03/
sex-lies-and-video-remixes-critiquing-mad-men-in-its-own-words/254912/ (accessed August 13, 
2014).
Guo, Lei and Lorin Lee. “The Critique of YouTube-based Vernacular Discourse: A Case Study of 
YouTube’s Asian Community.” Critical Studies in Media Communication  30, no. 5 (2013): 1–16. doi 
10.1080/15295036.2012.755048.
“HBO: Sex and the City: Homepage.” HBO . http://www.hbo.com/sex-and-the-city/index.html 
(accessed August 13, 2014).
Horwatt, Eli. “A Taxonomy of Digital Video Remixing: Contemporary Found Footage Practice on the 
Internet.” Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Reworking, Transformation. Scope: An Online 
Journal of Film and Television Studies . PDF e-book.
Howard, Robert Glenn. “Electronic Hybridity: The Persistent Processes of the Vernacular Web,” 
Journal of American Folklore  121 (2008): 192–218.
——. “The Vernacular Web of Participatory Media,” Critical Studies in Media Communication  25, no. 5 
(2008): 490–513.
——. “Toward a Theory of the World Wide Web Vernacular: The Case for Pet Cloning,” Journal of 
Folklore Research  42, no. 3 (2005): 323–360.
Jenkins, Henry, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a 
Networked Culture . New York, NY: New York University Press, 2013. Kindle e-book.
Kraidy, Marwan . Hybridity, or the Cultural Logic of Globalization . Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 
2005.
357
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO AS DISCOURSEKreisinger, Elisa, e-mail message to author, April 9, 2012.
——. Interview by Koa Beck, Daily Brink . http://www.dailybrink.com/?p=762 (accessed August 13, 
2014).
——. Pop Culture Pirate , http://www.popculturepirate.com (accessed August 13, 2014).
——. Sex and the Remix (Queering Sex and the City) Season 1 . YouTube video. 5:44. October 14, 2009. 
http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=Wn_WHLTK3qI (accessed August 13, 2014).
——. Sex and the Remix (Queering Sex and the City) Season 2 . YouTube video. 4:04. January 11, 2010. 
http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=JVWWQF2jcsg (accessed August 13, 2014).
——. Sex and the Remix (QueerCarrie Project: Queering Sex and the City) Seasons 3–6 . YouTube video. 
4:22. May 26, 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1QfWRD7qfA May 26, 2010.
——. QueerMen: Don Loves Roger Mad Men Remix . Vimeo video. 5:36. March 11, 2012. http://vimeo.
com/38342068 (accessed August 13, 2014).
——. “Queer Video Remix and LGBTQ Online Communities.” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 
(2012). doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0395.
Kuhn, Virginia. “The Rhetoric of Remix.” Transformative Works and Cultures  9 (2012). doi:10.3983/
twc.2012.0358.
Leonard, Philip. Nationality between Poststructuralism and Postcolonial Theory: A New Cosmopolitanism . 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Navas, Eduardo. “Remix Defined,” Remix Theory  (n.d.). http://remixtheory.net/?page_id=3 (accessed 
August 13, 2014).
Ogilvie, Corey. OgilvieFilm.com . http://www.ogilviefilm.com/index.html (accessed August 13, 2014).
Ono, Kent. A and John M. Sloop. “The Critique of Vernacular Discourse,” Communication Monographs  
62 (1995): 19–46.
——. Shifting Borders: Rhetoric, Immigration and California’s Proposition 187 . Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press, 2002.
Stewart, Dodai. “What if Don Draper Was Deeply in Love with Roger Sterling?” Jezebel . March 15 
2012. http://jezebel.com/5893622 (accessed August 13, 2014).
26
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS 
REMIX
Conor McGarrigle
While data-driven art is not new, recent developments in technical, artistic, and social 
spheres have coalesced to produce new opportunities for artists and activists who remix 
data with space and place to form locationally specific political critiques of great power 
and flexibility.
These opportunities arise from multiple factors including the wide availability of smart -
phones and other mobile devices, their location awareness and “always-on”  
network connectivity combined with an increased computational power. These location-
aware devices are capable of running complex apps that employ locational data to provide 
context-specific information. This location awareness is not new—it has been available 
in various forms since the early 2000s when unrestricted access to the Global Positioning 
System (GPS) was made available with the ending of selective availability.1 What is new 
is the ubiquity of these devices, their increased computational power, improved imaging 
systems, and the capability to add geolocation data to images and videos. Greatly improved 
hybrid positioning techniques have overcome the limitations of relying on GPS for posi -
tion, particularly in urban settings,2 which in turn have enabled an extensive infrastructure 
of social media applications that encourage users to share their location.
This places the individual as not only the author or producer of an extensive data trail 
but one which can be tracked in time and space, and one for which there is no longer a 
reasonable expectation of privacy.3 Preexisting concerns about data privacy, particularly 
for information held by the Internet big five (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft, 
and Apple), reached a crisis point in the wake of Edward Snowden’s 2013 revelations 
about the NSA’s PRISM program4 when the scale of possible surveillance of these data 
shadows was revealed to be significantly more comprehensive than previously thought. 
The purpose here is not to dwell on the implications of the lack of locational privacy 
immanent in location-aware networked devices, which have been well exercised in the 
media, but instead to lay out the landscape in order to examine methods for intervening 
in these areas and to identify the opportunities to work within (and against) the affor -
dances of these systems.
These developments have led to the increased ability of networked location-aware 
devices to effectively deliver real-time, location-specific, contextual remix. This 
builds on the idea of the mashup, familiar from Web applications such as the ubiqui -
tous Google Maps mashup, that incorporates constantly updated information or data 
359
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXsampled directly from a variety of database sources. For example a map displaying train 
station locations pulled from a static database mashed up with live timetable informa -
tion from a live data feed. In considering locative media as remix, however, I suggest 
there is more at work than this familiar scenario of combining related information into 
a single interface with the objective of increasing the information’s utility for the user. 
It is important to differentiate these first-order mashups, which combine data sources 
but essentially leave these sources untouched, from a locative media remix which 
operates at multiple levels, beginning with data. Data is in essence a text and can be 
remixed as such, this can be done statically or dynamically through algorithmic pro -
cesses which extract, sample, and combine multiple data sources in real time to form 
new data sets that are shaped by the logic of the remix expressed through the action 
of algorithms. For example the database of the NAMAland  case study had its origins 
in multiple sources such as corporate annual reports and business news reports pro -
cessed multiple times to produce a data set with a substantially different meaning and 
form than its base material.
Locative media remix thus goes further than a simple overlayering of information at 
specific locations, rather through its application of contextual artistic and activist data 
(itself already a remix) it offers a competing understanding of location. This draws on 
Lefebvrian ideas of spatial production that see space as a social product, defined by a 
complex set of interrelationships, resulting in a multiplicity of interconnected, overlap -
ping and competing spaces which influence, and are influenced by, each other.5 Locative 
media remix then operates at a number of levels; at the data level with data sampled 
from many sources and combined to produce a data set which owes more to the objec -
tive and logic of the remix than to the original source, and at the level of critical spatial 
practice6 through the introduction of competing spatialities which cause social space to 
be understood and produced differently. The final level of remix is the potential for user 
practices generated through these approaches to shape emergent location-aware tech -
nologies opening them to a broader constituency of users and expanding the range of 
normalized applications as the technologies stabilize.
These capabilities have come together with a burgeoning open data infrastructure, 
which provides the raw material for the remix. Open data initiatives in the United 
States, Western Europe, and, increasingly, in the developing world, make available 
vast swaths of data, often at no cost, about all aspects of city and government opera -
tions. Much of this comprehensive data is geotagged and supplied in formats that lend 
themselves to remix. In parallel with open data developments, more and more loca -
tional data is available from geotagged social media data such as tweets and shared 
images. Many of these social media services offer API7 access to their data and for 
those who do not, data-scraping techniques can usually be used to access this 
information.
Together, these represent accessible sources of large data sets about many aspects of 
urban life and its social practices which, when remixed with location-aware platforms 
such as mobile augmented reality (AR) browsers, present opportunities to overlayer 
urban space with data-powered critique, activist interventions, and powerful visualiza -
tions, providing new methods for understanding and engaging with the space of our 
cities. To consider how this works, the methods to be used, and the potential for remix 
to generate alternative knowledge I want to turn to early locative media art practice, 
which demonstrated an engagement with GPS that had a profound impact on this 
360
C. MCGARRIGLEemergent technology and, I argue, our understanding and application of location-aware 
technologies.
Locative Media as an Art Practice
Thomas McDonough described the Situationists as being engaged in “an attempt to 
change the meaning of the city through changing the way it was inhabited.”8 This could 
equally be applied to emergent locative media art practitioners, who attempted to change 
the meaning of locative technologies by changing the ways in which they are employed. 
When consumer level GPS technologies first became widely available in the early 2000s, 
the dominant view of location, one perhaps intrinsic to the GPS system, was Cartesian—it 
described position as a point in Cartesian space which could be uniquely identified by 
coordinates of longitude and latitude. Locative media practitioners, while working within 
the affordances of the GPS system, brought an expanded understanding through their 
introduction of new user practices, which ran counter to this prevailing view. This came 
from a desire to provide alternatives to existing views, which were seen as “unnecessarily 
impoverished.”9 Central to this understanding was the belief that as locational technology 
became available to a broader constituency it opened up previously unavailable opportuni -
ties, and allowed individuals and communities to augment space10 with context-sensitive 
annotations. In the words of Ben Russell’s prescient Headmap Manifesto , “what was once 
the sole preserve of builders, architects and engineers falls into the hands of everyone: the 
ability to shape and organize the real world and the real space.”11
The term “locative media” is widely accepted to have been first coined by Karlis 
Kalnins12 at the “Locative Media Workshop: Mapping the Zone” event, which took 
place in an abandoned Soviet-era military base in Karosta, Latvia from July 16 to July 
26, 2003.13 The term was originally employed to distinguish between the questioning of 
artistic uses of locative technologies from their instrumentalized commercial and mili -
tary uses. The proposition was that locative technologies, which had at this point (2003) 
only recently become widely available for civilian use, represented a fundamental,  
perhaps even paradigmatic, shift (or the means to bring about such a shift) in our per -
ception of geographic location. It was further proposed that the artistic uses of these 
technologies not only represented a new artistic medium, but had an important role to 
play in the opening up of the possibilities of the medium to everyone. In thinking about 
locative media and its influence on the unfolding and understanding of location-aware 
technologies, it is important to position it as an aleatory product of the GPS system. 
This places it in a very specific context as a practice only possible due to a multibillion-
dollar US military initiated space-based navigation, positioning, and timing system.14 
The essential enabling component of most locative work at this time was GPS, consist -
ing of a constellation of 24 orbiting satellites and an extensive network of earth tracking 
and control stations—a system that was developed at a cost of over $10 billion,15 with 
an annual $400 million maintenance bill, operated by the US Department of Defense 
to provide “navigation, position location, and precision timing services to users world -
wide.” This acknowledges that the “culture of location-awareness”16 from which locative 
media and its associated art practices spring, is a direct result of the military envisaging, 
design, and implementation of a satellite-based location system. On the other hand, it 
establishes it as a practice seeking to discover, in the words of Lisa Parks, “how might 
Western controlled satellite technologies be appropriated and used in the interests of a 
wider range of social formations?”17
361
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXYet, locative media is a parasitic practice, one that, while working within the GPS 
infrastructure, introduced spatial practices, which owe more to Henri Lefebvre’s concept 
of “lived space” than to what has been seen as the innate Cartesian translation of the 
GPS system. This distinction in approach, I suggest, comes down to the difference 
between understandings of “position” and “location.” “Position” is a point on a Cartesian 
grid identified by coordinates of longitude and latitude; for example, as I write this, my 
position can be uniquely identified by coordinates of longitude and latitude, which is 
very useful information if I was lost at sea, or to be targeted by a proximity marketing 
campaign, or a Predator drone, but provides no information about the nature of this 
place, its history, and the layers of association that constitute my relationship with it. 
This key differentiation is at the heart of locative media; the distinction between posi -
tion as instrumentalized localization of space as points in a Cartesian grid, to be tracked 
and targeted with locative technologies, and of “location” as an “existential, inhabited, 
experienced and lived place,”18 the space of individuals and communities replete with 
histories, narratives, and layers of association, which imbue location with meaning that 
can be revealed and made visible through the application of locative technologies.
In this way, locative media draw together a number of practices, technologies, and 
techniques to produce critical work, which augment real space with contextual layers of 
information enabled through the affordances of the technologies. Once this ability of 
the individual to locate herself (or to be located) in space and to access multiple layers 
of context-sensitive information exists, it opens up the possibility of new spatialities, 
from panoptical control space to spaces of radical transparency. Locative media artists 
operate within this window, establishing practices, which are sometimes experimental 
and other times eminently practical. In so doing, they establish a mode of operating for 
new location-aware technologies which, if successful, remain permanently inscribed. In 
this way, the pervasive games of Pac Manhattan19 or Brighton’s Blast Theory20 collective 
established location-aware mobile devices as tools for transforming the city into a playful 
space, whereas pioneering locative media projects such as Urban Tapestries,21 adopted a 
grassroots approach, where local communities tell their own stories, locating them in 
real space, to be accessed through location-aware technologies so that the technology 
becomes an enabling tool for creation rather than a broadcast channel.
With the increasing availability of contextual data sources, from the location-specific 
data sets of open data initiatives, to scraping geotagged social media and closed or pro -
prietary Web resources, new options are becoming available that follow in the tradition 
of these early locative media works, while augmenting them with extensive data-driven 
overlays. Before discussing these trends in more detail it is important to situate them 
within a history of data-driven art, a tradition which, I argue, informs recent work and 
provides an art historical perspective when considering location and data remixing.
Data in Art
The use of data as a tool of political critique within an art context has an established 
tradition,22 one in which the convergence of data and physical space of locational remix 
follows. I will trace this tradition through the work of three artists, Hans Haacke, with 
his seminal Shapolsky et al. Manhattan Real Estate Holdings, A Real Time Social System, as 
of May 1, 1971 ; Mark Lombardi and his data-based drawings and Josh On’s They Rule . 
The case of Shapolsky et al.  is of particular interest, as it was a data-rich installation 
detailing ownership of 142 (mostly tenement) properties and sites in New York City in 
362
C. MCGARRIGLEthe ownership or effective control of the Shapolsky family. The work was based on data 
derived from publicly available records assembled and refined, in the case of obfuscated 
records designed to conceal effective ownership, by the artist. The work reveals the city 
as a real estate system, uncovering its complex structure and demonstrating the ways in 
which the physical fabric of the city, and the arcane financial dealings designed to maxi -
mize the value of real estate holdings, are imbricated. It expands the idea of site beyond 
physical location to include its associated data space. This serves to activate these sites 
through remixing location with data to provide a sociopolitical narrative, transforming 
individual buildings by augmenting them with data and situating them within a complex 
network of property and financial transactions, with far-reaching consequences, both for 
the space of the city and for the everyday lives of the people living in these tenements. 
The work was slated for exhibition in the Guggenheim Museum, but was controversially 
canceled before its opening in April 1971. In her treatment of this infamous case, 
Rosalyn Deutsche identifies the specificity of the work as the principal reason given by 
the museum director, who held that social issues should be addressed “artistically only 
through symbolism, generalization and metaphor.”23 That the work was suppressed due 
to the specificity of its data-based critique demonstrates the potential of such an 
approach to deliver location-based critique of great impact.
The artist Mark Lombardi is known for his large-scale data-based drawings or “narra -
tive structures,” which detail the networks of power and money involved in various 
political financial scandals, such as the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce 
International detailed in BCCI-ICIC-FAB, c. 1972–1991 (4th Version), 1996–2000 . For 
each drawing, Lombardi built a custom database culled from published information 
sources and assembled onto cross-referenced index cards.24 The painter Greg Stone 
recounts the reaction of a friend, a reporter at The Wall Street Journal , who on seeing 
Lombardi’s George W . Bush, Harken Energy and Jackson Stephens  drawing, although famil -
iar with the characters in the narrative, said he “hadn’t fully understood the implications 
until he saw it all laid out that way.”25 Lombardi’s work illustrates thus how data-driven 
visual messages can have a greater impact on a viewer’s ability to understand relation -
ships in large-scale happenings.
Josh On’s Web-based work, They Rule ,26 pursues a similar mission of making connec -
tions between networks of powerful individuals connected though corporate director -
ships, once again drawing from publicly available databases ( Figure 26.1 ). They Rule  
provides a front-end interface to its underlying data, allowing users to make their own 
connections and share them with others. As a work of art, it presents a framework to 
interface with the data, inviting its users to provide the narrative structure and cocon -
struct the meaning. Originally powered from a custom database of directorships of the 
top 100 companies in the US, it now employs the database of LittleSis, a “free database 
of who-knows-who at the heights of business and government.”27 They Rule ’s move from 
a custom database, which represented a very significant research commitment on the 
part of the artist (as did Haacke’s Shapolsky et al. ) to LittleSis, which collates and makes 
this information freely available and accessible, is significant as it demonstrates the 
power of newly available data resources to supply raw material for remixing for a wide 
range of applications.
These projects illustrate that the power of data art lies in its ability to re-present and 
remix information to reveal the underlying structures and patterns. How then can ubiq -
uitous networked location awareness of mobile devices and emergent AR add to this 
tradition, in an era where data and its use has assumed a greater importance than ever 
363
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXbefore what can art practice contribute to this burgeoning field? At this point I will 
introduce a case study of a recent work, which follows in the tradition of data art. It is a 
work that does not claim any technical innovation, that was created for an existing 
platform and built using free and open source software, but it offers a powerful example 
of the ways in which data can politically activate sites and, I suggest, a model for remix -
ing data space and physical space to create an activated hybrid space.
NAMAland
NAMAland28 is an augmented reality artwork, built on the Layar platform, which 
remixes a custom data set with location and AR techniques to visualize and critique 
aspects of the Irish financial collapse, through an overlayering of the city of Dublin with 
a database-driven data layer, which identifies properties under the control of the 
National Assets Management Agency (NAMA) ( Figure 26.2 ).
NAMA is an Irish government agency established in December 2009 to acquire 
bad property loans from Irish banks with the aim of removing them from the banks’ 
balance sheets as a bailout mechanism. The agency, which was controversial from They  Rule
Lists
Companies
Institutions
Find C onnection
Recent maps
Popular maps
Save  map
Clear map
Print map
Add not e
Log in
Sign up
Full scr een
Auto
AboutDeer e & C ompa nyTexas Instr umentsUnited Technologies
CorporationOccidental
Petroleum Mutual of
Omaha
Insurance Pfizer Inc.
TRW Automotiv e
Holdings
Hershey
Exelon
Citigr oup
Dole F ood C ompan y
AES
Hess Corporation
DuPont
Union P acific
CorporationThe Boeing
Compan yCaterpillarFederal Expr ess
CorporationWells FargoAMERIGR OUP
CorporationMarathon Oil
CorporationAECOMAonNorthrop Gr umman
CorporationRicha rd B
MyersChristine
Todd
WhitmanSpencer
Abraham Anthon y J
Principi
Paul H
O’Neill
Tom Ridge
Nicholas
Calio
Elaine Chao
Samuel
Bodman Andrew H
Card JrSusan C
Schw abRobert K
SteelJohn W
SnowNorman Y
Minet a
Figure 26.1    They Rule , Josh On, website screenshot, 2004 (all images in this chapter 
courtesy Conor McGarrigle)
364
C. MCGARRIGLEthe start, acquired properties worth approximately €40 billion, but failed in its stated 
aim of bailing out the banks, culminating in Ireland entering an IMF/EU bailout 
program in November 2010 due to the imminent collapse of the banking system. 
Despite (or perhaps because of) its central role in the financial collapse, NAMA was 
secretive in its workings. Legally exempted from freedom of information require -
ments, the agency was intent on shielding its property portfolio, and the individuals 
and corporations involved, from public scrutiny under the guise of “commercial 
sensitivity.”
Building on Hans Haacke’s treatment of the Shapolsky real estate holdings and New 
York City, it was obvious that mapping out NAMA’s property holdings was essential to 
gain an understanding of the organization and the events that led to its creation, in 
order to open it to scrutiny and critique. After some research I was able to identify an 
alternative, activist source of information on NAMA properties on the anonymous 
website NAMA Wine Lake.29 Maintained as a Google Doc, the spreadsheet was com -
piled from multiple published sources of information connecting property developers 
known to be in NAMA, their directorships of companies and properties controlled by 
these companies. Each entry was well-documented with links to the original published 
sources, important in a litigious climate. This data was, however, locationally vague. 
Street names were typically included with vague descriptors such as “site on Mayor St.,” 
but lacked sufficient detail to automatically geotag. With further research it was possible 
to initially manually geotag approximately 120 Dublin properties through visually iden -
tifying the sites in person and tagging them with a handheld GPS device. For legal 
reasons the database had to be confined to properties that could be located with a high 
degree of certainty and for which sufficient documentary evidence of their ownership 
could be provided. This data was then used to create a geotagged MySQL database, 
which became the data source for NAMAland .
Figure 26.2  NAMAland , Conor McGarrigle, augmented reality app, 2010
365
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXThe application was built in October 2010 and has been updated on a regular basis 
since. It employs the Layar platform, which provides a development environment and 
software platform to create AR applications that run on the Layar App for Apple iOS 
and Android devices. Layar provides a standardized user interface, with limited options 
for modification, and supplies a set of standard AR methods upon which Layars can be 
built. It was selected for two reasons; the first was ease of use—it imports a database 
effectively and is a working, reasonably robust, AR app, which can be deployed with a 
minimum of development. The data that drives the Layar is contained in a self-hosted 
open source MySQL database, which can be updated regularly without recourse to 
Layar’s approval and without need to update the app to get the latest information. 
Second, it provided a method of publishing a politically sensitive work on the iPhone 
(at the time the most popular smartphone platform in Ireland) as Layars are submitted 
to Layar’s own approval process and publishing through the Layar iPhone app, effec -
tively evading Apple’s app store gatekeeping, essential for a politically sensitive app 
working with gray, unofficial data.
The NAMAland  Layar in operation takes the location of the user’s phone and com -
pares it to this database of geotagged properties of NAMA properties within certain 
defined ranges ( Figure 26.3 ). An overlay of properties within the specified range is then 
created which can be further interrogated for ownership details (the majority of proper -
ties in NAMA are associated with a small number of individuals with vast property 
holdings and billions in defaulted loans). The location of each response is indicated by 
an overlay of a cartoon Monopoly Man figure over NAMA properties in the camera-
view of the user’s device. It also generates a real-time map of localized NAMA proper -
ties, along with a list of nearby properties and their locations. NAMAland  thus visualizes 
Figure 26.3  NAMAland , Conor McGarrigle, screen capture from mobile app, 2010
366
C. MCGARRIGLEthe extent of NAMA property ownership, allowing users to identify nearby properties 
and interrogate specific regions of the city for NAMA connections. As the first mapping 
of NAMA properties available NAMAland  succeeded in capturing the popular imagina -
tion in Ireland.
It was widely reported in the mainstream media, including an interview and report on 
the Nine O’Clock News on RTE (the Irish national broadcaster), and it has been fea -
tured numerous times on national radio and in national and international print media 
on many occasions. The title, NAMAland , has even entered common usage as a descrip -
tor for the post-IMF bailout situation. The project has, more importantly, succeeded in 
focusing attention on its subject matter where more traditional approaches failed. It 
overcame official attempts to limit information and discussion on the subject, and has 
acted as a conduit through which concerns over the lack of transparency inherent in 
NAMA could be expressed. On one level it operated as a mobile app, a ready-to-hand 
source of information locating NAMA properties, as a myriad of other apps locate coffee 
shops and restaurants. However as an intervention, particularly one with political aspi -
rations, it was not sufficient to remain as a “virtual” intervention; it needed to operate 
in conjunction with physical actions to be effective. In this respect it was vital that the 
project was expanded to include real world events such as walking tours, situated public 
discussion forums, public speaking engagements, media coverage, and individual inter -
ventions, with the work itself being an amalgam of all its constituent components.
Peripatetic Activism
The most significant activities were a series of walks, informed by the mobile app, which 
took place in Dublin City Center and Tallaght, two areas characterized by a high con -
centration of NAMA properties. These were public, as with the NAMA-Rama  event in 
conjunction with Market Studios, the In These Troubled Times  event with RuaRed Arts 
Centre and Ireland after NAMA with The Exchange Arts Centre, and private activities, 
such as the guided walks for RTE News and Channel Four News TV crews. In this way 
the project bridged the gap between the abstract data set hosted in an online database 
and the real space of the city, the walking interventions, in effect, acting as a locational 
remix. The location-aware mobile app first takes the user’s position, placing her on a 
point on a Cartesian grid. Position is then transformed into location (in the locative 
media sense) as the app remixes location with an activist database of NAMA connec -
tions creating invisible, but readily accessible, annotations, which attach to familiar 
buildings and public spaces. This creates a remixed narrative that presents the spaces of 
the city within the network of financial and property transactions and light-touch gov -
ernment regulation, which had far-reaching implications. This establishes the condi -
tions, through a spatialization of the data, for a walking forum, airing the NAMA 
debates at the sites where NAMA and its role in austerity politics of the bailout are 
concretized.
Walking is essential for the NAMAland  project—it is necessary to deploy it on the street 
for it to operate at all. The guided walks, through careful selection of routes, were able to 
maximize this impact by proceeding through areas of the highest concentration of land -
mark buildings and, as participatory events, functioned as walking forums facilitating  
participants by discussing the issues represented by NAMA and its property portfolio 
(Figure 26.4 ). NAMA represents a complex system of abstract financial dealings, transac -
tions that have become disconnected from everyday understanding, but yet have 
367
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXsignificant and very real consequences. The project and its walks attempt to counter this 
growing abstraction of space—they operate in hybrid space,30 that is, “a convergence of 
geographic space and data space”31 where the distinctions between Manuel Castell’s space 
of place (physical space) and the space of flows (informational space)32 collapse with the 
overlayering of context-sensitive data. Whereas the narrative of NAMA was the narrative 
of the property market, international finance, and IMF bailouts, NAMAland  reconnected 
these issues to real spaces in order to expose their interconnectedness and consequences.
These activities were all supported and enabled through the remix of a locationally 
specific data layer, the affordances of location-aware smartphones and the application 
of AR technology. They offered multiple points of entry and modes of engagement with 
the project, which were not necessarily technologically dependent and remained open 
to as broad a constituency as possible, even those without access to smartphones. Indeed, 
as the project disseminated, it became clear that many of the people who spoke to me 
of the project were not actually users, as they didn’t have a phone capable of running 
the application. Their experience of the project was second hand, passed to them as a 
story which resonated as a tale of resistance. Somebody had used mobile technology to 
reveal a list of NAMA properties despite efforts to keep this information from the pub -
lic. It wasn’t even necessary to see it in operation, it seemed to be enough to know that 
it had been done. The walking artist Francis Alÿs speaks of his work as myth making; he 
sets out to “keep the plot of a project as simple as possible, so that it can be told as a 
story, an anecdote, something that can be transmitted orally without the need to have 
access to images.”33 NAMAland  similarly has a simple narrative that can be told as a 
story, which means that even without access to the requisite technology, the project still 
succeeds at some level. Not only does NAMAland  recount a story about NAMA and its 
Figure 26.4  Participatory NAMAland  walk in Dublin
368
C. MCGARRIGLEconsequences, but from the point of view of AR it speaks of the technology and its uses. 
This ability to rethink and recontextualize technologies is at the heart of the remix, and 
is of particular significance for emergent technologies, as it is through practice that func -
tions and usage modes of technologies come to light and their relative value and impor -
tance is revealed. At another level NAMAland  acted as a catalyst, facilitating a range of 
conversations, debates, and activities as part of a wide-ranging critique of NAMA and 
the sequence of events that led to it. The project crossed boundaries from art to geogra -
phy, urbanism, activism, open data, economics, and politics as one would expect from 
work that engages critically with the space of the city, international finance, and IMF 
bailouts. As the project became known through publicity and word of mouth, another 
side was revealed from the diversity of the discussions, from the Occupy Dublin camp 
one day, to city-sponsored seminars on open data and the smart economy the next; this 
was its ability to function as a conduit that reconnected NAMA with the space of the 
city, a connection which had been deliberately severed, to preserve the idea of the gov -
ernment agency as a by-product of obscure international financial dealings. What 
NAMAland  contributed was not only an opening up of previously unavailable data, but 
a reconnecting of this data with the fabric of the city itself. This served to add specificity 
in place of generalization, fueling debate through the provision of an infrastructure on 
which specific spatial critiques could be structured, supplying a point of entry hitherto 
unavailable. NAMAland  data was opened to other interested groups, unconnected to 
this author, resulting in a series of direct actions such as the Occupy NAMA  and Welcome 
to NAMAland  (Figure 26.5 ) interventions made possible by the availability of accurate 
data. This is the power of the locational data remix and with the unprecedented avail -
ability of data from both open data initiatives and though social media APIs, the 
Figure 26.5  Welcome to NAMAland intervention in Dublin
369
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXpotential is considerable, yet because it is reliant on data sources over which it has no 
control, it is also a precarious practice.
Precariousness of Data
The growth in open data has seen a considerable increase in the availability of high-
quality data sets from governmental and city sources. Data.gov,34 the clearing-house for 
US governmental open data, lists in excess of 64,000 available sets, and this increase is 
reflected internationally. Other important sources of data are social media platforms such 
as T witter, Facebook, Google+, Flickr, and Foursquare, whose APIs offer access to their 
data. While this data is currently available, it is tied to problematic models, which could 
potentially could lead to access restrictions in the future. T witter has imposed strict rate 
limits on access to its data while offering commercial access through reseller companies.35 
The open data model is driven by the rhetoric of the smart economy and a desire for 
transparent public services, with a view toward increasing efficiency. For example 
Dublinked, the Dublin City open data initiative launched in November 2011, seeks to 
“encourage the next generation of jobs and companies in the area of urban solutions, by 
enabling data-driven innovation and promoting Dublin as a world-leader in developing 
and trialing new urban solutions.”36 With the European Commission estimating the value 
of the European open data market at €27 billion,37 initiatives such as those underway in 
Dublin aim to secure a portion of that market. This view of open data as driver of the smart 
economy places a monetary value on data, which potentially could lead to a commerciali -
zation of this valuable raw material, with the current phase a transitory “gold rush” of free 
access to high-value data sets. These trends are already evident with T witter’s API changes 
restricting access to T witter big data to paying customers,38 reflecting the realization that 
for social media platforms like Facebook their product is user data.39
However, in tandem with these developments, we have seen the emergence of a range 
of data-scraping techniques and tools, which allow researchers, activists, and artists to 
access restricted data. Art works such as Paolo Cirio and Alessandro Ludovico’s Face to 
Facebook ,40 which scraped one million Facebook profiles and remixed the data as 
Lovelyfaces.com , a fake dating site matching the stolen profiles using facial recognition 
techniques, demonstrate a hacktivist response to these trends, which seeks alternate meth -
ods to access and deploy this data. While data scraping, until recently, required a high 
degree of coding skills with many scrapers written in the Python language, newer services 
are becoming available which allow nonprogrammers to scrape data. Scraperwiki.com, one 
of the longest established data scraping and storage services, recently overhauled the sys -
tem allowing users to scrape a limited range of data sources without writing a line of code. 
Importi.io offers a beta point-and-click tool, which promises to allow a range of Web 
scraping features without needing to resort to the detailed source code parsing typically 
required. In the way that OpenStreetMap emerged in response to the restrictions of 
Google Maps to build an open source digital map of the world that rivals its commercial 
competitors in scope, it can be expected that these trends will continue, enabling contin -
ued access to data, even in the face of a commercially driven data lock-down.
Conclusion
I have argued elsewhere41 that artistic practices, which engage with emergent technolo -
gies, are involved in a process of shifting the understanding of these technologies.  
370
C. MCGARRIGLEAs Richard Coyne writes “technologies do not conform politely to predetermined or 
intended functions”42 rather it is through use that functions and usage modes come to 
light and their relative value and importance is revealed. AR, as it stands, is being pro -
moted as a marketing technology, with the principal AR browsers developing corporate 
tie-ins using image recognition to replace QR codes43 in conjunction with location-
based AR applications. The technology is being thus presented and developed as a 
method of connecting companies with their customers in real space. While these appli -
cations will be a feature of the mature practice of AR, they are, to invoke the developers 
of the Urban Tapestries public authoring project, “unnecessarily impoverished.”
Art practices have a role to play in broadening the understanding and application of 
technologies through expanding their range of applications and permitted usages. 
NAMAland  demonstrates one such application, but the potential for these tools is only 
limited by the data sets that can be accessed and the desire of artists and activists to 
engage with them as part of their practice. At an everyday level this might take the form 
of locative technology enabling a retailer to combine data and location to deliver loca -
tion-aware special offers and deals to a customer’s phone. However, this coexists along -
side the ability of the user to interrogate the retailer’s history on a range of issues from 
health and safety to their environmental record, or simply customer satisfaction. This is 
not necessarily to privilege one over the other. Both have their place but what is of 
prime importance is that multiple options coexist as aids to informed decision-making, 
where the user can offset, for example, say a welcome reduction in the price of a cup of 
coffee earned by checking-in against a company’s antiunion policies.
NAMAland  is an application that remixed data and location at multiple levels, enabled 
through the affordances of AR technology, to deliver a political critique and catalyze a 
range of interventions, in the process reaching a wide audience through usage, mainstream 
media accounts, and word of mouth. This success establishes AR as a tool of political 
critique, which can reveal and situate information and data of political significance. When 
connected to the burgeoning open data movement, AR has an even more significant role 
to play in the realm of political criticism. Open data seeks to make freely available data 
collected by government and city authorities both in the interests of transparent govern -
ment and as an impetus to the smart economy. As new sources of data become available 
there are opportunities for artists and activists to go beyond the rhetoric of the smart 
economy and develop critical narratives based on remixing this newly liberated data. This 
emergent practice has the power to expand the range of practices and strengthen locative 
technologies as tools for enhancing and critiquing everyday life with the addition of data. 
This, I suggest, can be achieved through practices that resonate with their audiences, 
assimilating themselves into the technology by establishing meaningful connections to the 
everyday, expanding the logic of the remix into locational data.
Notes
 1 Selective availability is an intentional degradation of the accuracy of GPS for nonmilitary receivers, see 
GPS.gov. http://www.gps.gov/systems/gps/modernization/sa/ (accessed September 9, 2013).
 2 Hybrid positioning involves a mixture of positioning techniques including cell tower location, Wi-Fi 
signals as well as GPS to get a faster and more accurate location fix.
 3 Dominic Rush, “Google: Don’t Expect Privacy When Sending to Gmail,” The Guardian , August 15, 2013, 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/14/google-gmail-users-privacy-email-lawsuit.
 4 Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, “NSA Prism Program Taps in to User Data of Apple, Google and 
Others,” The Guardian , June 6, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data.
371
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIX 5 Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space  (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991), 86–87.
 6 Jane Rendell, “Critical Spatial Practice” (2008), http://www.janerendell.co.uk/chapters/critical-spatial-
practices-a-feminist-sketch-of-some-modes-and-what-matters.
 7 An application programming interface (API) is a method for developers to programmatically access 
selected functions and data of a platform for other applications.
 8 Thomas F . McDonough, “Situationist Space,” October  67, Winter (1994): 77.
 9 Alice Angus et al. “Urban Social Tapestries,” IEEE Pervasive Computing  7, no. 4 (2008).
10 Lev Manovich, “The Poetics of Augmented Space,” Visual Communication  5, no. 2 (2006).
11 Ben Russell. “The Headmap Manifesto” (1999) http://technoccult.net/technoccult-library/headmap/.
12 Marc Tuters and Kazys Varnelis, “Beyond Locative Media: Giving Shape to the Internet of Things,” 
Leonardo  39, no. 4 (2006).
13 See http://locative.x-i.net/ for the original workshop Web page (accessed September 9, 2013).
14 USAF Space Command Global Positioning Systems Wing, http://www.losangeles.af.mil/library/facts  
heets/factsheet.asp?id=5311 (accessed September 9, 2013).
15 Scott Pace et al., The Global Positioning System: Assessing National Policies , RAND Corporation (1995), 
http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR614.html.
16 Julian Bleecker and Jeff Knowlton, “Locative Media: A Brief Bibliography and Taxonomy of GPS-
Enabled Locative Media,” Leonardo Electronic Almanac  14, no. 3 (2006).
17 Lisa Parks, Cultures in Orbit: Satellites and the Televisual  (Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2005).
18 Ibid.
19 Pac Manhattan  was a 2004 urban game developed by the Interactive Telecommunications program at 
NYU that enacted the computer game Pacman  on the streets of Manhattan, http://pacmanhattan.com/ 
(accessed March 3, 2014).
20 Blast Theory is group of artists who have created mixed reality urban games and performances since 1991, 
http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/ (accessed March 3, 2014).
21 Urban Tapestries was a pioneering public authoring research and development project developed by 
Proboscis between 2002 and 2004, http://urbantapestries.net/ (accessed March 3, 2014).
22 A tradition which can be traced to Jack Burnham’s articulation of Systems Art in the 1960s see, Jack 
Burnham, “System Esthetics,” Artforum  (September, 1968); reprinted in Open Systems: Rethinking Art c. 
1970  ed. Donna De Salvo (London: Tate, 2005), 166–169.
23 Rosalyn Deutsche, Evictions Art and Spatial Politics  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 169–181.
24 Deven Golden, “Mark Lombardi,” Art Critical , November 1, 2003, http://www.artcritical.com/2003/11/01/
mark-lombardi.
25 Frances Richard, “‘Obsessive—Generous’ Toward a Diagram of Mark Lombardi” (2002), http://www.
wburg.com/0202/arts/lombardi.html.
26 They Rule , theyrule.net (accessed September 9 2013).
27 LittleSis , Littlesis.org (accessed September 9 2013).
28 NAMAland , http://www.conormcgarrigle.com/namaland.html (accessed September 9 2013).
29 NAMA Wine lake, http://namawinelake.wordpress.com (accessed September 9 2013).
30 See Steve Harrison and Paul Dourish. “Re-place-ing Space: The Roles of Place and Space in Collaborative 
Systems,” in Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 7: 67–76 
(ACM, 1996) http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=240193; and Eric Kluitenberg. “The Network of 
Waves: Living and Acting in a Hybrid Space,” Open  11 (2006): 6–16.
31 Drew Hemment, “Locative Arts,” Leonardo  39, no. 4 (2006): 348–355.
32 Manuel Castells, The Rise of the Network Society  (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2000).
33 Mark Godfrey, Francis Alÿs: A Story of Deception  (London: Tate Publishing, 2010).
34 Data.gov/metric (accessed September 9, 2013).
35 T witter introduced restrictions on API access in August 2012 while offering packaged data for sale 
through licensed companies Gnip and Datasift, see http://blog.twitter.com/2012/changes-coming-to-
twitter-api (accessed March 6, 2014).
36 Dublinked.com (accessed September 9, 2013).
37 Re-Use of Public Sector Information—Review of Directive 2003/98/EC , Communication from the 
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions, http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:
0212:FIN:EN:PDF .
38 Dick Wisdom, “How T witter Gets In The Way Of Knowledge,” Buzzfeed , January 4, 2013, http://www.
buzzfeed.com/nostrich/how-twitter-gets-in-the-way-of-research.
372
C. MCGARRIGLE39 Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Facebook Reminds Users: All Your Data Is Fair Game,” The Wall Street Journal , 
August 29, 2013.
40 See http://www.face-to-facebook.net/ (accessed March 6 2014).
41 Conor McGarrigle, “The Construction of Locative Situations,” PhD, Dublin Institute of Technology, 
2012.
42 Richard Coyne, The Tuning of Place: Sociable Spaces and Pervasive Digital Media  (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2010).
43 QR codes are square barcodes that connect to a URL when scanned with a mobile device.
Bibliography
Angus, Alice, Dikaios Papadogkonas, George Papamarkos, George Roussos, Giles Lane, Karen Martin, 
Nick West, Sarah Thelwall, Zoetanya Sujon, and Roger Silverstone. “Urban Social Tapestries.” 
IEEE Pervasive Computing  7, no. 4 (2008): 44–51. doi:10.1109/MPRV .2008.84.
Bleecker, Julian, and Jeff Knowlton. “Locative Media: A Brief Bibliography and Taxonomy of GPS-
Enabled Locative Media.” Leonardo Electronic Almanac  14, no. 3 (2006).
Burnham, Jack. “Systems Esthetics.” In Open Systems: Rethinking Art c. 1970 , edited by Donna De 
Salvo, 166–169. London: Tate Publishing, 2005.
Castells, Manuel. The Rise of the Network Society . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2000.
Coyne, Richard. The Tuning of Place  : Sociable Spaces and Pervasive Digital Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2010.
Deutsche, Rosalyn. Evictions Art and Spatial Politics . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Dwoskin, Elizabeth. “Facebook Reminds Users: All Your Data Is Fair Game.” The Wall Street Journal , 
August 29, 2013.
Frances, Richard. “‘Obsessive—Generous’ Toward a Diagram of Mark Lombardi.” Wburg.com , 2002. 
http://www.wburg.com/0202/arts/lombardi.html (accessed August 13, 2014).
Godfrey, Mark. Francis Alys: A Story of Deception . London: Tate Publishing, 2010.
Golden, Deven. “Mark Lombardi.” Art Critical , November 1, 2003. http://www.artcritical.
com/2003/11/01/mark-lombardi (accessed September 9, 2013).
Greenwald, Glenn, and Ewen MacAskill. “NSA Prism Program Taps in to User Data of Apple, Google 
and Others.” The Guardian , June 6, 2013. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-
giants-nsa-data.
Harrison, Steve, and Dourish, Paul. “Re-Place-Ing Space: The Roles of Place and Space in Collaborative 
Systems.” In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 7: 
67–76. ACM, 1996. http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=240193 (accessed August 13, 2014).
Hemment, Drew. “Locative Arts.” Leonardo  39, no. 4 (2006): 348–355.
Kluitenberg, Eric. “The Network of Waves: Living and Acting in a Hybrid Space.” Open  11 (2006): 
6–16.
Lefebvre, Henri. The Production of Space . Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
Manovich, Lev. “The Poetics of Augmented Space.” Visual Communication  5, no. 2 (June 2006): 219–
240. doi:10.1177/1470357206065527.
McDonough, Thomas F . “Situationist Space.” October  67, Winter (1994): 58–77.
McGarrigle, Conor. “The Construction of Locative Situations.” PhD, Dublin Institute of technology, 
2012.
Pace, Scott, Gerald P . Frost, Irving Lachow, David R. Frelinger, Donna Fossum, Don Wassem, and 
Monica M. Pinto. The Global Positioning System: Assessing National Policies . RAND Corporation, 
1995. http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR614.html (accessed August 13, 2014).
Parks, Lisa. Cultures in Orbit: Satellites and the Televisual . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005.
Rendell, Jane. “Critical Spatial Practice,” 2008. http://www.janerendell.co.uk/chapters/critical-spatial-
practices-a-feminist-sketch-of-some-modes-and-what-matters (accessed August 13, 2014).
373
LOCATIVE MEDIA AS REMIXRe-Use of Public Sector Information—Review of Directive 2003/98/EC . Communication from the 
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions. http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=COM:2009:0212:FIN:EN:PDF (accessed September 9, 2013).
Rush, Dominic. “Google: Don’t Expect Privacy When Sending to Gmail.” The Guardian . August 15, 
2013. http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/14/google-gmail-users-privacy-email-
lawsuit (accessed August 13, 2014).
Russell, Ben. “The Headmap Manifesto,” 1999. http://technoccult.net/technoccult-library/headmap/ 
(accessed August 13, 2014).
Tuters, Marc, and Kazys Varnelis. “Beyond Locative Media: Giving Shape to the Internet of Things.” 
Leonardo  39, no. 4 (2006): 357–363. doi:10.1162/leon.2006.39.4.357.
Wegener, Mareike. Mark Lombardi—Death Defying Acts of Art and Conspiracy . Documentary, 2011.
Wisdom, Dick. “How T witter Gets In The Way Of Knowledge.” Buzzfeed , January 4, 2013. http://www.
buzzfeed.com/nostrich/how-twitter-gets-in-the-way-of-research (accessed September 8, 2013).
37427
THE POLITICS OF JOHN 
LENNON’S “IMAGINE”
Contextualizing the Roles of Mashups 
and New Media in Political Protest
J. Meryl Krieger
Remix and mashup are mechanisms of recycling or transforming materials from other 
media creators with the aim of producing new content. As distinct from remixing, mash -
ups not only reuse older materials but retain the references that often provide cultural 
contextualization for the mashup audience. Remixes often attempt to blend these mate -
rials to the point where original authorship or identifiers can be lost. Mashups are also 
often used conceptually as a metaphor or trope for cultural change while incorporating 
techniques of remixing. This essay explores remix and mashup as cultural processes of 
transformation and re-creation. I focus attention specifically on the mashup and remix 
by CalTV and WaxAudio, “Imagine This,” released in 2005/2006 to demonstrate my 
case. My goal is to address a lack of scholarly attention to the intersection of remix and 
mashup as they intersect with protest movements.
In what follows, I examine the role of remix and mashup through the metaphors 
and tropes generated from the work of singer-songwriter John Lennon with particu -
lar focus on his 1971 song “Imagine,” and its ongoing use in enactments of political 
protest across the globe. I begin by historically situating Lennon himself within the 
genre of protest music, and the widespread dissemination of music videos through 
the Internet became feasible due to rapid expansion of computer technologies, par -
ticularly access through the increase of bandwidth in the first decade of the twenty-
first century. My analysis includes an interview conducted with Irish filmmaker John 
Callahan, who uses the professional name of CalTV , who created the “Imagine This” 
video mashup based on WaxAudio’s remix. This interview with Callahan, allows me 
to add the thread of professional filmmaking to the scholarly discussions of the place 
of video mashups in contemporary society during this formative period of social 
media sharing. I further explore the place of “Imagine This” as a text around which 
a protest public could engage in discourse furthering its cause. I conclude by consid -
ering some of the theoretical and analytical implications the example of “Imagine 
This” provide for the study of music video remix and mashup in protest communities 
in online research, engaging with ideas from Bloodgood and Deane (2005), Berger 
375
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE”(2009) and Warner (2002). Finally, I selec -
tively review the role that social media play in 
communities of protest, with particular empha -
sis on the place of YouTube during the mid-
2000s period when “Imagine This” was first 
released on the Internet.
Historically, protest as a political consideration 
receives scholarly attention from political scientists, sociologists, anthropologists, and 
others, while mashup and remix get limited attention as vehicles for those protest state -
ments. Instead, they are frequently treated as static objects rather than creative processes 
that are part of public discourse surrounding an ongoing social or political concern. This 
latter approach is the essential, underlying assumption embedded in my approach to this 
essay.
The attention remix and mashup get is most often embedded in research addressing 
specific regions or countries, with some limited attention to the role (particularly) remix 
plays in politics. There have been increases in the remix and mashup dissemination of 
spoken and music video, mostly from the DIY, “bedroom filmmaker” community. CalTV 
and WaxAudio’s mashup “Imagine This” occurred at a unique juncture of events and 
practices where professional video and audio production intersected with a global anti -
war sentiment that developed around the United States’ incursion into Iraq. The con -
fluence of factors include the roles of then President George W . Bush, anti- and prowar 
sentiment regarding the US-led invasion of Iraq, and the place of John Lennon as a 
political, particularly left-wing, antiwar figure. These occurred during a time when the 
explosion of commercially available Internet bandwidth gave rise to social media shar -
ing sites, notably YouTube, in 2005, from which UGC (user-generated content) politi -
cally charged media objects could be disseminated, shared, and dissected. John Lennon 
here can be understood in contrast with Bob Geldof, a musician who uses music and 
music performance as a vehicle for encouraging awareness about social issues, such as 
the first globalized presentation of musicians working to highlight and educate the 
Western world about starvation in Africa during the first Live Aid concert in the early 
1980s. It is clear that having a public figure consistently identified with that political 
ideology allows communities to coalesce, creating a nexus point for public expression 
and education.
John Lennon’s “Imagine,” Remix, and Protest Music
In the 1960s, political protest in the United States could be recognized in forms that 
looked remarkably like protest communities anywhere in the world of its time or from 
generations before: groups of individuals congregating in a particular place to make a 
statement against political policies that were objectionable in some fashion, most nota -
bly those regarding the Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War. At that time 
there was already a long history of musical involvement in countercultural political 
statements.1
Mainstream, mass culture has co-opted many vehicles formerly used by such counter -
cultural movements, and the American public in particular is jaded into ignoring all but 
the most sensational aspects of political statement in any form. Such vehicles have not 
vanished, but have instead transformed themselves through new mass communication 
technologies into collectives that would be almost unrecognizable in generations past. See Chapter 38  for Eric S. 
Faden’s discussion on creating 
a remixed video that cleverly 
protests the restrictive nature of 
traditional copyright laws.
376
J. M. KRIEGEROnline communities have evolved to take on the leadership role in such social move -
ments in contemporary culture, ranging from groups like MoveOn.org on the liberal end 
of the spectrum, to the conservative groups, gopusa.com and conservativeusa.org.
One place where these changes have been evident is YouTube.com, one of the most 
common public websites hosting user-generated videos. YouTube launched in 2005 as a 
site where:
everyone can watch videos  . . . People can see first-hand accounts of current 
events, find videos about their hobbies and interests, and discover the quirky 
and unusual. As more people capture special moments on video, YouTube is 
empowering them to become the broadcasters of tomorrow.2
This transformation of protest community from predominantly live and synchronous to 
predominantly online and asynchronous has happened so naturally and rapidly, within 
the span of a decade, that it seems useful to step back and look at how this transforma -
tion took place.
During its early years, YouTube described itself as a community that supports and 
encourages dialog and interaction. In reality, from its beginnings YouTube has oper -
ated more as a space in which the public comes together to dialog, interact, and focus 
cultural objects or texts that appeal to different communities and different individuals 
for highly divergent reasons. These cultural objects, whether spoken or music videos, 
appeal to different communities whose concerns range from dialog and interaction to 
purely commercial. Because these cultural objects can be read in a variety of ways, 
they can become the focus for an aspect of community action—in this case the inter -
national protest movement against military intervention in Iraq by the United States 
and its allies. YouTube as a space for collective dialog as a public space engages with 
the DIY sensibility of UGC. Many new media scholars consider YouTube to have been 
an outgrowth of the DIY approach to media and file sharing of fan-based creative work 
that dates back to the 1970s. Some of the restrictions placed on uploading have been 
generally targeted toward limiting the spread of pirated copies of commercially pro -
duced media.3
Similarly, remix as a musical practice gets less attention from music scholars. In his 
discussion to contextualize what he terms the “remix era,” Manovich argues that this 
lack of recognition of remix as musical practice comes from its related absence from 
music industry discourse—it is tied to copyright violation and is consequently labeled 
“stealing.” This emphasis on identifying remix as theft, consequently delegitimizing it 
as a cultural text, is a basic element in the conflict of interest between the artistic and 
commercial goals of members of the music community.4 While Manovich brings the case 
into the twenty-first century, as Porcello notes, the debate over the ethics of digital 
music sampling had long been the subject of debate among audio recording engineers.5
Despite the ongoing public discourse about YouTube as an online site for amateur 
production during this period, those video products that got widespread distribution fall 
into two basic categories—productions aspiring to or following professional standards of 
commercial video/audio production, and productions that are unabashedly amateur that 
appeal to a temporary public interest or fad. Burgess and Green address the tensions 
between these two—user-generated, or expressions of “vernacular creativity” and “tra -
ditional media.”6 Purcell brings the data up to the time of this writing, specific to the 
US market, noting that the number of (US-based) American users who upload and 
377
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE”share content on social media sites like YouTube, and more recently Vimeo, have steadily  
increased:
The introduction of video-sharing site YouTube in 2005, and later other video-
sharing sites like Vimeo, has been the driving force in the increasing percentage 
of online adults who post, watch and download videos. [Between 2006 and 
2013]  . . . the percent of online adults using video-sharing sites has grown from 
33% to the current figure of 72%.7
Since 2001, a number of social movements have engendered protest community expres -
sion, heavily using social media and other online sources for community identification 
and expression. Ethnomusicologists and cultural studies scholars focusing on particular 
communities have engaged in ethnographic research exploring the behaviors of those 
communities8 but they have not specifically addressed the roles that new media tech -
nologies play in those protest communities. Historically there has been something of a 
“blind eye” to technology in the ethnographic study of community behaviors; the role 
of remix is a similar instance, for example, to that of the role of technology in recording 
music performance. This is something of a curious anomaly since technology is funda -
mental to the discipline of ethnomusicology, but it was not until Louise Meintjes’s 
important 1990 study of Paul Simon’s Graceland  (1986) that ethnomusicological schol -
arship began to formally problematize the technologies that record performance, explor -
ing the role of racialized apartheid politics in the production and performance of 
recorded music.9 Ethnographic research into media technologies has expanded through 
the two decades since Meintjes’s study into the study of the impact of recording tech -
nologies themselves,10 though it is more often carried out through media studies, socio -
logical research, and other social science disciplines.
Political Activism in the Americas:  
The Move from Live to Mass Mediated
Activism through popular music has a long history. In the United States, Woody Guthrie 
and Pete Seeger became central figures in the union and civil rights movements from 
the 1930s through the 1960s. By the end of this period, a number of popular culture 
figures emerged in connection with counterculture protest. Bob Dylan had taken on, in 
one fashion or another, the mantle of Woody Guthrie, and The Beatles’ John Lennon 
became politicized by the late 1960s and was actively involved with nonviolent antiwar 
protesting with his second wife, artist Yoko Ono. Lennon’s death in 1980 cemented his 
place as an icon to antiwar protests.11 Similarly, from the early days of the digital age 
there has been a clear trend in the use of popular artistic and cultural figures to clarify 
and articulate the vision of political and social movements.
In the 1980s a sense of the possibilities of such public attention joined with new 
technological capabilities in communication. This new movement in pop figure public 
social engagement signaled a change in the kinds of authority required to get the atten -
tion of large parts of the public. A clear case demonstrating this new potential came in 
the (Western) worldwide production of Live Aid, produced by Boomtown Rats singer 
Bob Geldof, and Ultravox leader Midge Ure, first as a single in 1984 by a “supergroup” 
of British pop musicians (“Do They Know Its Christmas”) and then as a live, interna -
tional fundraising event in 1985:
378
J. M. KRIEGER[t]he event was tagged as a music event like none the world had ever seen, but even 
the advance hype couldn’t accurately portray the momentousness of the occasion. 
After all, no one had ever tried to coordinate two massive concerts on two conti -
nents with the world’s biggest music stars, and make the whole thing a sufficiently 
slick TV event to encourage the kind of donations Geldof had in mind.12
Geldof’s feat inspired others, from “We Are the World” copenned by Michael Jackson 
to Hands Across America, Farm Aid, Comic Relief, and others. While these efforts 
continue into the twenty-first century, they get less notice, partly due to fundraising 
exhaustion, often called “donor fatigue,”13 but also because of the decentralization of 
media and the proliferation of outlets.14 Indeed, the tool kit necessary to bring together 
the elements needed to run a Live Aid in the current millennium would be nearly lost 
in the background noise of contemporary media. In 2005 Geldof organized Live 8, simi -
lar to Live Aid except that the focus was social justice rather than charity. While the 
event itself was a great success, it engaged in a whole other sphere of international activ -
ity, namely the relationship between politics and social change. Burkeman notes that 
Geldof, for all his abilities as an organizer and his vision to make a difference in the 
world, lacked the political skills and credentials to successfully navigate this arena, often 
proceeding with what he describes as an “utopian” worldview rather than what he 
describes as the “messy pragmatism” necessary to create actual change.15
While some political activists can successfully navigate political terrain, most do this 
in dialog with publics with whom they have common ground. Geldof engaged with the 
political elite of the British government, then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair, coming 
away tarnished. Burkeman connects Geldof’s ideas with internationally critiqued 
American President George W . Bush, who at this same point in time was being criticized 
for his poor response to Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath in New Orleans, Louisiana.16
The tools of political activism had changed by 2005. Since then the target audience 
has become as important as the message it conveys. “Imagine This,” a 2006 mashup 
video by CalTV , aka Irish filmmaker and image artist John Callahan, built on the 
WaxAudio remix by Australian Tom Compagnoni, was released July, 2005 on the digital 
album Mediacracy .17 Like Geldof’s Live Aid, “Imagine This” became influential for its 
imitators’ use of found footage and music already associated with political protest mes -
sages. “Imagine This,” first posted to YouTube in March, 2006, itself played on 
WaxAudio’s use of President George W . Bush’s public image (among his detractors), as 
Callahan commented, as the “village idiot,” with subsequent mashups that used similarly 
politicized themes including rx2008’s mashup of the U2 song “Sunday Bloody Sunday” 
in 2006 which, like “Imagine This,” uses publicly accessed footage of President George 
W . Bush in its creation.18 Both these videos use politically charged musical materials to 
protest military intervention, a common theme in political protest music that has been 
connected with American military actions since the 1960s.
Protest Icons: “Imagine” and John Lennon
Callahan’s and WaxAudio’s “Imagine This” is part of a continuous legacy of John 
Lennon and his song “Imagine” as icons of popular song and antiwar protest. Lennon 
first became involved with the antiwar protests after his marriage to Yoko Ono in 1969, 
with their first “Bed for Peace” protest in March, 1969; it was during this period of his 
career, in 1971, when the album Imagine and its title song were released. The 
379
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE”construction of Lennon as a working-class hero and antiwar icon began with the peace 
vigil surrounding his death in 1980 and continues to the present day.
Contemporary sources problematize Lennon as a person, but his image remains in use 
as an icon of peace, leftist politics, and antiwar movements across the world.19 The song 
“Imagine” appears regularly, performed in a variety of places around the world by profes -
sional and amateur performers as part of protest events. In 2010 the New Statesman  pub-
lished the top 20 protest songs, as compiled by the Political Science Association. “Imagine” 
is ranked eighteenth.20 By 2011 John Lennon had become an institutionalized symbol for 
political protest that he is included in educational curricula as a pop culture icon, peace 
movement activist, and poet.21 In 2013 and 2014 “Imagine” has been performed by famous 
performers and amateurs across the globe, continuing to build on this representation.22
CalTV on “Imagine This,” Remix, and Political Protest
On being asked why he created the “Imagine This” mashup, filmmaker John Callahan 
comments:
The video was a reaction to the song  . . . I was doing a masters at the time and 
was working on a project for that  . . . I heard the WaxAudio track on BBC radio 
and it stopped me in my tracks, I was amazed at the work that went into finding 
the G[eorge] W . Bush samples, and I instantly thought, wouldn’t it be funny if 
I could find all the exact same video and match them up, but  . . . “surely some -
one has done that already,” so I checked and nobody had.  . . . I contacted the 
creator of the song and asked him if he had extracted the audio from video. My 
initial plan was to match it up to that, but he had extracted everything from 
audio clips so I had to start from scratch.
At the time, as like most people, I was against the Iraq war  . . . in a way it 
politicised me slightly  . . . The main goal was to replicate the mood of the audio, 
which basically poked fun at G[eorge] W . Bush by playing on his image of the village 
idiot, whilst making an important point at the same time.23
Callahan uses video mashups as a way of expressing a personal statement and of his own 
developing politicization. For Callahan, this mashup expresses his view by using tools at 
his disposal to express his opposition to the US-led war in Iraq and his interest in how 
audiences understand the content he uses. As Stavans notes, art can be a way to either 
explore the human condition or “blow off steam.”24 Callahan, as a professional film -
maker, used his film and video skills as an expression of individual creativity, and only 
second as political statement.
I was originally drawn to mashups for two reasons. I think, one, they were “easy” 
to make, I didn’t need to shoot anything and I could usually rip the footage from 
somewhere online, the other was because of the work that was being done by 
people like Hexstatic, Ninja Tune, DJ Food etc. in the mid-2000s, they were 
doing very inventive mashups using audio that worked particularly well in a live 
“dancefloor” setting at music festivals etc.  . . . it added an extra dimension to live 
performances of “mashup” music, which I think is needed, because as a genre it 
can become a bit repetitive, the video side adds another element of craft and skill 
to it, and also humour which I think is really important, and really I work in music 
video rather than film, and that’s what was turning me on at the time.25
380
J. M. KRIEGERLater, when asked about why he didn’t stay with mashups as a creative tool he notes: “I 
didn’t stick with mashups as find them a bit limiting and repetitive  . . . Aesthetically 
they are a little unappealing also. It was just a case of the correct tool/medium to match 
the song/audio.”26
Despite the early appeal of creative, dance music mashups as a technique for his own 
creative agenda, mashup proved less productive as a sustained tool for his aesthetic goals 
compared to production techniques Callahan had access to as a professional filmmaker. 
T wo additional points are very striking. First, the series of technological confluences that 
allowed his mashup to be widely distributed to a disparate public. Second, the new, 
increased availability of video footage from George W . Bush’s presidency marks the 
beginnings of an era when online access to video footage of a major chief of state was at 
an unprecedented level for its time. The possibilities for a dissection of political move -
ments or materials for political commentary are certainly something that could be 
addressed in further research.
Callahan comments that the timing of “Imagine This” was part of the key to its  
success and impact:
the reaction was unexpected but in some ways the timing was important; it was 
released around the start of YouTube and caught the first wave of people’s inter -
est in that  . . . Media and film festivals also were interested as it was part of the 
first wave of “bedroom filmmakers,” and they like that aspect of it as a pointer 
toward the future and as a way of showing anti-Iraq war sentiment in art.27
Fan works and “bedroom filmmakers” are common and the most popular media on 
YouTube involve music, though US audiences are also highly interested in videos with 
political content.28
Mashup and Remix as Texts for Protest Publics
Warner’s concept of publics is central to understanding remixing and mashup as texts, 
or cultural objects, that helped spread a wider appreciation for the protest movement 
against the US invasion of Iraq. This correlates with the global anti-American, and 
anti-George W . Bush, sentiment that crystallized in 2004–06 as part of the DIY culture 
in public online forums. As Warner notes, where a public comes into being only in 
relation to a text and its circulation,29 the possibilities of mediated performance and 
interaction take on the emergent possibilities in DIY media production; something 
that clearly emerged around Callahan’s “Imagine This.” Bloodgood and Deane note 
that protest songs being used in the early twenty-first century are more often than not 
recycled older songs, and that few new ones are being written, particularly in genres 
strongly associated with protest music of the past, such as folk music in the 1960s, or 
rap and hip hop in the 1980s and 1990s.30 Protest songs from the past thus become a 
metaphor for successful activism and political protest. Lennon’s songs “Imagine” and 
“Give Peace a Chance” are layered texts upon which Callahan’s creative statement of 
protest against George W . Bush and the US invasion of Iraq could be presented in 
sound and image.
John Lennon’s iconic status with online protest communities and their ties to our 
ideas of community, public, audience, text, and performance becomes key to understand 
the success of the mashup, and its ongoing relevance and impact on video audiences. 
381
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE”Such performances can be indexed to specific events that took place during Lennon’s 
life, and to the events identified in the mashup.
Warner’s articulation of a public as a grouping that can coalesce around a text allows 
us to understand why CalTV and WaxAudio’s “Imagine This” were important when it 
was released in 2006.31 As Manovich notes, 2006 was a period where rapid technological 
changes were happening in new media platforms and technology, leading many creative 
professionals and amateurs to experiment with creating and sharing ideas that were, in 
one fashion or another, “remixed”.32 These texts interacted with one another—one 
posted video was put up in response to its predecessor—or curators and other creators 
(Purcell) might respond through comments attached to the video.33 Given the DIY 
nature of YouTube, it is only to be expected that some of these texts would be responding 
to international affairs, more specifically the Bush Administration’s war in Iraq, which 
was opposed by a number of communities and groups across the globe. “Imagine This” 
had a strong influence on mashup videos responding to political issues that continue 
into the current era, though the topic has unsurprisingly shifted from President George 
W . Bush to President Barack Obama and other contemporary political figures. These 
videos similarly span the gamut of support for each public figure.34
Mashups and remixing can be quite successful at articulating specific issues and/or 
addressing particular constituencies as they are repurposed by professionals who channel 
the views of the protest community. One might question, based on publicly available 
mashup lists on YouTube and SoundCloud, to what extent mashups function as creative, 
rather than political texts; Callahan’s one conclusion was to move away from the 
mashup format because he found it limiting. It is notable that productions like Callahan’s, 
as such visible means of political statement by a professional filmmaker, can be seen in 
only a small number of cases and then primarily during this mid-2000s period. While 
they are still being developed professionally, most music remixes seem to be grounded 
in the world of dance music—either in electronica or in generic variants of hip hop. 
Political elements can be frequently found in mashups and remix but the dominant 
issues are local/national, rather than international, and personal to the artist involved 
in each case. The use of John Lennon as an icon here fits the antiwar sentiments that 
Callahan and those who gravitated to his video by means of their agreement with his 
political agenda and/or their personal veneration of Lennon the activist.
Conclusion: Remix as Practice and Metaphor  
for Public Expression and Protest
Remix, without a doubt, functions as part of the discourse of protest community discourse. 
Political remixing as a professional audio and video practice may have a limited range of 
public viability. However, an experiment I conducted during the summer of 2013 on 
Facebook provides an example of the ways that mass culture is remixing protest music as 
a metaphor I describe earlier, using Bloodgood and Deane’s description.35 While in the 
final stages of writing this chapter, I decided to informally poll my own network with a 
public post36 requesting friends’ favorite political remix or mashup videos. While not one 
of my respondents could come up with a remix audio or video that matched the classifica -
tion of political—other than the example of “Imagine This,” which I provided when asked 
for an example, all came up with parodies that spoke to political or politicized issues, that 
themselves remix elements of popular culture in a music video format. My expectation was 
that respondents would mention rap remixed videos produced in North Africa, or the 
382
J. M. KRIEGER“Sunday Bloody Sunday” remix that came out immediately after CalTV and WaxAudio’s 
“Imagine This.” What my audience was doing was interpreting mashup and remix through 
the filter of the mass media they regularly consume. In short, they were translating remix 
into a metaphor of cultural expressions. This experiment allows us to reframe the paradigm 
for how we understood remix and the place remixes hold in contemporary online culture 
from strictly practical to metaphorical, reflecting the ways cultural practice has integrated 
other physical practices into digital cultural and metaphor.37
One compelling element of “Imagine This” is how it illuminates the period in which 
the mashup itself was released, during that first wave of “bedroom film production” 
dominating the early period of YouTube in 2005 and 2006. A combination of forces were 
at work—an international community who were protesting the war in Iraq and President 
George W . Bush’s policies that led to this engagement, the new accessibility at the con -
sumer level for posting remix, and the lack of other, more user-friendly, technologies. 
Callahan comments that, in terms of protest media, “people will just go where the audi -
ence is. I can’t see specific [protest] tools being developed, people will just use whatever 
is easiest and most widely available: T witter, YouTube, etc.”38 While Callahan may not 
himself recognize his impact, the stylistic components of “Imagine This” has had a 
strong impact on subsequent video remixes, and the professionalization of political 
remix can be seen in those that came after him. YouTube has not remained the only site 
of distribution, but its impact on the artistic production of political statements has been 
vast and will remain one tool of many for the foreseeable future. Geldof’s move of politi -
cal activism to mass media still creates ripples in the ways that political activism is 
expressed by music makers and filmmakers. Remixes and mashups are invaluable tools 
for creative expression for “bedroom filmmakers.” With the lack of support from the 
mainstream music industry for professional protest songs and events, protest statements 
have returned to the reuse of traditional materials, allowing remixers to use commonly 
understood tropes of social commentary, and icons of political protest to be remixed into 
new contexts and new causes.
Notes
 1 Bloodgood and Deane (2005) trace this history in the United States. Additional instances can also be 
identified through the nationalist movements across Europe and Latin American from the late nine -
teenth through the mid-twentieth centuries. Elizabeth Bloodgood and Shelley M. Deane, “Where Have 
All the Protest Songs Gone? Social Movements’ Message and Their Voice in Politics,” presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, September 2, 2005, 10. Used with 
permission of the authors.
 2 http://youtube.com/t/about (accessed September 30, 2007).
 3 Upload limits in 2006 when CalTV uploaded “Imagine This” were ten minutes in length and 1GB in file 
size; a demonstration of the increase in capacity for video in social media sharing can be seen in the 
hugely expanded capacity: by 2013 videos from any user have a time limit of 15 minutes, but users with 
a “channel” can upload videos of unlimited length (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YouTube).
 4 Lev Manovich, “What Comes After Remix?” (2007) http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/what-
comes-after-remix.
 5 Thomas Porcello, “The Ethics of Digital Audio-Sampling: Engineers’ Discourse,” Popular Music  10, no. 
1 (1991), 69–84.
 6 Jean Burgess and Joshua Green, YouTube Online Video and Participatory Culture  (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2009), 26, 41–44.
 7 Kirsten Purcell, “Online Video 2013.” Pew Research Institute Internet and American Life Project, 
October 10, 2013, Washington, DC. http://www.pewinternet.org/files/old-media//Files/Reports/2013/
PIP_Online%20Video%202013.pdf
383
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE” 8 Examples come from the #Idlenomore and #Occupy protest communities that can be seen in the follow -
ing: Idle No More Flash Mob dancing in Portland, or at http://youtu.be/3xVvE8Ymrpw; Round Dance 
Flash Mob Calgary at http://youtu.be/HGCD8B9RPDg; and J11Action’s “#J11: Idle No More Global Day 
of Action—January 11, 2013” at http://youtu.be/-mKefAbUbCs (all accessed July 16, 2013).
 9 Louise Meintjes, “Paul Simon’s Graceland, South Africa, and the Mediation of Musical Meaning,” 
Ethnomusicology  34, no. 1 (1990).
10 See, for example, Leslie C. Gay, Jr. and René T. A. Lysloff, eds., Music and Technoculture  (Middletown, 
CN: Wesleyan University Press, 2003); Louise Meintjes, Sounds of Africa! Making Music Zulu in a South 
African Studio  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003); Paul D. Greene and Thomas Porcello, eds., 
Wired for Sound: Engineering and Technologies in Sonic Cultures  (Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University 
Press, 2005); and J. Meryl Krieger, “Rough to the Board: Creating Performance in American Recording 
Studios” (PhD dissertation, Indiana University, 2009).
11 The understood position of Lennon’s iconic status is evident from the kinds of essays found consistently 
about him on the Internet. They follow some combination of the following three patterns. They either 
laud Lennon as an icon of antiwar protest, or attempt to dismantle his iconic status as a cultural icon, or 
finally they assume his status as a cultural icon of antiwar protest and attempt to analyze one facet or 
another of his artistic and political expression. Some examples of these include: New Statesman ’s “Top 20 
Political Songs: Imagine/John Lennon/1971” (http://www.newstatesman.com/music/2010/03/lennon-
imagine-political) and Rolling Stone ’s “John Lennon: Biography” (http://www.rollingstone.com/music/
artists/john-lennon/biography#ixzz2T2qQrXNw) (both accessed May 11, 2013).
12 Gil Kaufman, “Live Aid: A Look Back at a Concert that Actually Changed the World,” MTV .com, June 
29, 2005, http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1504968/live-aid-look-back.jhtml.
13 Donor fatigue is a generally understood phenomenon among charitable organizations. See, for example, 
Tim Sarrantonio “A Few Ways to Avoid Donor Fatigue” NEON CRM http://www.z2systems.com/neon -
crm/blog/few-ways-avoid-donor-fatigue (accessed May 9, 2014).
14 Donor fatigue has also been compared with the compassion fatigue experienced by caregivers for chronically 
and terminally ill patients. Controlling media exposure is one common technique to avoiding this problem: 
David Porter “Charity and Compassion Fatigue is Wearing Down Fundraising” The Compassion Fatigue 
Awareness Project. http://www.compassionfatigue.org/pages/davidporter.pdf (accessed January 15, 2012).
15 Oliver Burkeman, “Three Months Ago Bob Geldof Declared Live 8 Had Achieved Its Aim. But What 
Really Happened Next?” The Guardian , September 12, 2005, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/
sep/12/hearafrica05.development.
16 Ibid.
17 http://www.waxaudio.com.au/audio/political-eps-mashed-media-trilogy/mediacracy (accessed August 14, 
2014).
18 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PXnO_FxmHes (accessed August 14, 2014).
19 Seth Mullins, “John Lennon and the Peace Movement: Cutting through the Political Rhetoric and 
Jargon that Keeps People in the Dark” (2007), formerly available at: http://voices.yahoo.com/john-len -
non-peace-movement-185959.html.
20 New Statesman  “Top 20 Protest Songs.”
21 “John Lennon Lesson Plan—Anniversary of his birth—October 9th;—anniversary of his death—
December 8th.” Developing Teachers.com 2012 lesson plan, http://www.developingteachers.com/plans/
lennonpf.htm 9/2/2013.
22 Joan Baez—live performance in Turkey—June 17, 2013: http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/folk-legend-joan-baez-
sings-imagine-turkish-480170 (accessed August 19, 2014); Eddie Vedder in Meco, Portugal, responding 
to violence between Israel and Palestinians: Kory Grow, “Eddie Vedder Plays ‘Imagine’ at Concert, 
Reinforces Anti-War Stance,” Rolling Stone , July 21, 2014, http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/
eddie-vedder-reinforces-anti-war-stance-plays-imagine-at-concert-20140721; and responding to the 
December 16, 2012 gang rape of a 23-year-old student on a bus in New Delhi, India, 600 guitarists 
attempt to set a world record by performing ‘Imagine’ live at the Darjeeling Tea and Tourism Festival: 
http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/01/03/india-gang-rape-victim-john-lennon_n_2402287.html, 
with video footage at http://youtu.be/njz6ztJzxOE (both accessed August 19, 2014).
23 John Callahan, personal interview, July 18, 2013.
24 Ilan Stavans, Art and Anger: Essays on Politics and the Imagination  (New York, NY: Palgrave, 2001).
25 John Callahan, personal interview. July 26, 2013.
26 John Callahan, personal interview, August 6, 2013.
27 Ibid.
384
J. M. KRIEGER28 Sysomos, Inc., “Inside YouTube Videos: Exploring YouTube Videos and Their Use in Blogosphere—
Michael Jackson and Health Care Dominate” (2010) (http://www.sysomos.com/reports/youtube/).
29 Michael Warner, Publics and Counterpublics  (New York, NY: Zone Books, 2002), 66.
30 Bloodgood and Deane, “Where Have All the Protest Songs Gone?” 10.
31 A discussion of the contrast in the ways publics can be understood here can be found in Cody (2011), 
who contrasts Warner’s position on publics with those of Habermas and Anderson. Francis Cody, “Publics 
and Politics,” Annual Review of Anthropology  40 (2011): 37–52.
32 Lev Manovich, “The Practice of Everyday (Media) Life,” in Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube , 
ed. Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer (Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008), 33–44.
33 Purcell, “Online Video 2013.”
34 Many examples demonstrate this: “99 Problems” at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2C22wBf2h5k; 
and probably the most clearly connected to CalTV’s “Imagine This,” “Obama State of the Union Remix” 
at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVmq5A4m1fU; “Bachmania! ‘Countdown’s Michele Bachmann 
Remix” at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wytKBIC_ZNA; and “You Be Da Man! Michelle Bachmann 
Soils Herself in Public While Michael Steele Cringes” at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h-
DQANalAe0, among many others (all accessed August 14, 2014).
35 Bloodgood and Deane. Ibid. 10.
36 My own Facebook network consists of about 750 persons, who can generally be classed as active partici -
pants in social media and online culture. I am not accounting for Facebook’s algorithm, which has a 
strong impact on who sees these posts.
37 Indeed, I am not suggesting something new. Manovich (2005 and 2007) projected and recognized this 
move to remix as a metaphor for public cultural expression. Lev Manovich, “Remixability” (2005) http://
www.manovich.net/DOCS/Remix_modular.doc and Lev Manovich, “What Comes after Remix?” (2007) 
http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/what-comes-after-remix.
38 John Callahan, personal interview. August 7, 2013.
Bibliography
BBC.com. “1985: Live Aid Makes Millions for Africa.” July 13, 2008. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/
hi/dates/stories/july/13/newsid_2502000/2502735.stm (accessed July 21, 2013).
Berger, Harris M. Stance: Ideas about Emotion, Style, and Meaning for the Study of Expressive Culture . 
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2009.
Bloodgood, Elizabeth and Shelley Deane. “Where Have All the Protest Songs Gone? Social 
Movements’ Message and Their Voice in Politics.” Presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Political Science Association in Washington, DC, September 2, 2005 (with permission 
of the author, granted July 11, 2013).
Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture—Digital Media and 
Society . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009.
Burkeman, Oliver. “Three Months Ago Bob Geldof Declared Live 8 Had Achieved Its Aim. But What 
Really Happened Next?” The Guardian , September 12, 2005. http://www.theguardian.com/
world/2005/sep/12/hearafrica05.development (accessed July 21, 2013).
Cody, Francis. “Publics and Politics.” Annual Review of Anthropology  40 (2011): 37–52.
Edwards, Richard, and Tryon, Chuck. “Political Video Mashups as Allegories of Citizen Empowerment” 
First Monday  14 no. 10 (2009).
Gay, Leslie C., Jr., and René T. A. Lysloff, eds. Music and Technoculture . Middletown, CN: Wesleyan 
University Press, 2003.
Geldof, Bob. “Live 8: What’s It All About.” http://www.live8live.com/whatsitabout/ (accessed July 21, 2013).
Greene, Paul D., and Thomas Porcello, eds. Wired for Sound: Engineering and Technologies in Sonic 
Cultures . Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University Press, 2005.
Grobelny, Joseph. “Mashups, Sampling, and Authorship: A Mashupsampliography.” Music Reference 
Services Quarterly 11, no. 3/4 (2008): 229–239. doi:10.1080/10588160802570375.
Grow, Kory. “Eddie Vedder Plays ‘Imagine’ at Concert, Reinforces Anti-War Stance.” Rolling Stone , 
July 21, 2014. http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/eddie-vedder-reinforces-anti-war-stance-
plays-imagine-at-concert-20140721 (accessed August 19, 2014).
385
THE POLITICS OF JOHN LENNON’S “IMAGINE”Howard-Spink, Sam. “Grey Tuesday, Online Cultural Activism and the Mash-up of Music and 
Politics.” First Monday  9, no. 10 (2004). http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/
article/view/1180/1100 (accessed August 14, 2014).
“John Lennon Lesson Plan—Anniversary of his birth—October 9th;—anniversary of his death—
December 8th.” Developing Teachers.com 2012 lesson plan. http://www.developingteachers.com/
plans/lennonpf.htm (accessed September 2, 2013).
Kaufman, Gil “Live Aid: A Look Back at a Concert that Actually Changed the World,” MTV .com. June 
29, 2005. http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1504968/live-aid-look-back.jhtml (accessed July 21, 2013).
Krieger, J. Meryl. “Rough to the Board: Creating Performance in American Recording Studios.” PhD 
dissertation, Indiana University, 2009.
——. Interview with John Callahan/CalTV . June–August, 2013.
Leaf, David, and John Scheinfeld, producers. 2006. The U.S. vs. John Lennon . Lionsgate and VH1: 
Santa Monica, CA. Documentary film.
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin, 
2008.
“Live Aid.” http://www.bobgeldof.com/content.asp?section=31 (accessed June 22, 2013).
Lovink, Geertz, and Sabine Niederer, eds. Video Vortex Reader Responses to YouTube . INC Reader #4. 
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.
Lovink, Geertz, and Miriam Rasch, eds. Unlike Us Reader: Social Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives . 
INC Reader #8. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2013.
Manovich, Lev. “Remixability and Modularity.” 2005. http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/
remixability-and-modularity (accessed August 14, 2014).
——. “What Comes after Remix?” 2007. http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/what-comes-after-
remix (accessed August 14, 2014).
——. “The Practice of Everyday (Media) Life.” In Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube , edited by 
Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer, 33–44. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2008.
Meintjes, Louise. “Paul Simon’s Graceland, South Africa, and the Mediation of Musical Meaning.” 
Ethnomusicology  34, no. 1 (1990): 37–73.
——. Sounds of Africa! Making Music Zulu in a South African Studio . Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2003.
Mullins, Seth. “John Lennon and the Peace Movement: Cutting through the Political Rhetoric and 
Jargon that Keeps People in the Dark,” (2007) formerly available at: http://voices.yahoo.com/john-
lennon-peace-movement-185959.html (last accessed May 11, 2013).
Porcello, Thomas. “The Ethics of Digital Audio-Sampling: Engineers’ Discourse.” Popular Music  10, 
no. 1 (1991): 69–84.
Postill, John. “Digital Politics and Political Engagement.” In Digital Anthropology , edited by Heather 
A. Horst and Daniel Miller, 165–184. London: Berg, 2012.
Purcell, Kristen. “Online Video 2013.” Pew Research Center’s Internet and American Life Project, 
Washington, DC, 2013. http://www.pewinternet.org/files/old-media//Files/Reports/2013/PIP_
Online%20Video%202013.pdf (accessed May 9, 2014).
Shiga, John. “Copy-and-Persist: The Logic of Mash-up Culture.” Critical Studies in Media Communication 
24 no. 2 (2007): 93–114. doi:10.1080/07393180701262685.
Simons, Jan. “Between iPhone and YouTube: Movies on the Move?” In Video Vortex Reader 2: Moving 
Images Beyond YouTube , edited by Geert Lovink and Rachel Somers Miles. INC Reader #6. 
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2011.
Stavans, Ilan. Art and Anger: Essays on Politics and the Imagination . New York: Palgrave, 2001.
Sysomos. “Inside YouTube Videos: Exploring YouTube videos and their use in blogosphere—Michael Jackson 
and health care dominate.” 2010 http://www.sysomos.com/reports/youtube/  (accessed October 1, 2013).
Tacchi, Jo. “Digital Engagement: Voice and Participation in Development.” In Digital Anthropology , 
edited by Heather A. Horst and Daniel Miller, 225–241. London: Berg, 2012.
Warner, Michael. Publics and Counterpublics . New York: Zone Books, 2002.
“YouTube.” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Youtube (accessed September 5, 2013).
38628
DÉTOURNEMENT 
AS A PREMISE OF 
THE REMIX FROM 
POLITICAL, AESTHETIC, 
AND TECHNICAL 
PERSPECTIVES
Nadine Wanono
In the late 1950s the French revolutionary artists’ group the Situationist International 
(SI) formed to fight against, and destabilize, capitalist society by creating visual repre -
sentations, objects, and situations that would question the spectators, invite them to 
reconsider their own position toward society, and increase their international conscious -
ness. Guy Debord and Constant Nieuwenhuys articulate the SI initiative, as “The situ -
ationists must take every opportunity to oppose retrograde forces and ideologies, in the 
culture and wherever the question of the meaning of life arises.”1
An example of their actions and modalities is an attack made by the SI during the 
International Assembly of Art Critics in Belgium. They disrupted the press conference 
by handing out a flyer signed “In the name of the Algerian, Belgian, French, German, 
Italian and Scandinavian sections of the SI, by Khatib, Korun, Debord, Platschek, 
Pinot-Gallizio and Jorn.”2 It was a tactic that had served them well as the Lettrist 
International when they disrupted a Charlie Chaplin press conference,3 or when one 
member, dressed as a priest, denounced God and the church from the pulpit of Notre 
Dame cathedral.
To reach international audiences, they supported acts of defiance such as the Los 
Angeles Watts race riots of 1965. They wrote and asked for support from artists and 
intellectuals in Europe to sign the Declaration on the Right to Insubordination in the Algerian 
War and published it in September 1960. Within their home nation of France, they 
made assaults on cyberneticians at Strasbourg University in 1966 and against sociolo -
gists at Nanterre University. These violent actions were a prelude to the events of May 
‘68, the first wildcat strike in history and the largest general strike to stop the economic 
functioning of an industrial capitalist society. In a speech about the aftermath in June 
387
DÉTOURNEMENT AS A PREMISE IN REMIX1968, Charles de Gaulle declared “this explosion was provoked by groups rebelling 
against modern consumer and technical society, whether it be the communism of the 
East or the capitalism of the West.”4
The ramifications of this movement in different cultural contexts are interesting 
enough to warrant a specific study of its history, its goals, and its various means of 
expression.
The transmission of these powerful political and aesthetic moments were part of my 
training initiated with Jean Rouch; and were rooted in the dynamic of détournement5 a 
word that is nearly impossible to translate into English. Ken Knabb who translated into 
English most of the texts of the Situationist movement explained “The French word 
détournement  means deflection, diversion, rerouting, distortion, misuse, misappropria -
tion, hijacking, or otherwise turning something aside from its normal course or 
purpose.”6
A look back on Rouch’s transmission process, regularly referring to these ideas, could 
be a useful tool allowing us to fully understand the ways such ideas and values can be 
transmitted in an academic context. Jean Rouch, ethnologist, engineer and internation -
ally famous filmmaker, questioned our relationship to the so-called “real,” our ways of 
perceiving differences in cultural expression, and our means of understanding phenom -
ena classified as invisible.
After a brief historical overview of the SI and their political agenda based on 
détournement , I will explore some of the work produced by Jean Rouch as a connecting 
factor between the SI and the remix movement to recall some of the different forms 
taken by the remixer in the visual arts and in music production, and then examine how 
the détournement , in correlation with the programming language, affected remix and 
influenced it in regard to its different political, aesthetic, and technical dimensions.
History
To fully understand the dynamic and theoretical position of the SI, we should keep in 
mind that since 1940, aesthetic production was fully transformed into a commodity, as 
Walter Benjamin outlined in his work.7
On July 27, 1952, in Italy, a collective of avant-garde artists, members of several 
movements and associations such as Cobra for Copenhagen, Brussels, Amsterdam, the 
Lettrist movement, the International Movement for an imaginiste  Bauhaus of Asger Jorn 
and the London Committee, founded the Situationist International (SI). One of its 
prominent thinkers and most powerful personalities was Guy Debord.
We can detect three main periods in the development of the Situationists. The 
Lettrists formed an experimental avant-garde movement, which became emblematic 
through a text by Ivan Chtcheglov, “Formulary for a New Urbanism,”8 which became 
part of the new direction of the International Lettrists and also part of the archives of 
the SI. The text exemplifies the position of the Surrealists who focused on “forgotten 
desires” in the city. The act of déambulation  in the city, without self-consciousness, echo -
ing the “ cadavre exquis ” technique based on the random juxtaposition of words—these 
personal meanderings were part of a process to rediscover visual meanings inscribed in 
the city which conveyed negation, rebellion and eccentricity.
The second period, 1958–62, gave rise to an experimental form of expression: the 
imposition of additional or altered speech, bubbles on preexisting photo-comics, 
388
N. WANONOpromotion of guerrilla tactics in the mass media, production of situationist films and 
comic strips. Later, from 1963 to 1968, the SI developed the theory and practice of the 
Exemplary Act. In “Our Goals and Methods in the Strasbourg Scandal,” members of the 
SI wrote, “In fact, we want ideas to become dangerous again. We cannot be accepted 
with the spinelessness of a false eclectic interest, as if we were Sartre’s, Althusser’s, 
Aragon’s or Godard’s.”9 They developed an incisive and coherent critique of Western 
capitalism and Eastern bureaucratic capitalism. Their singular position toward political 
classification took them to the edge, navigating between socially or morally unaccepta -
ble positions, revolutionary discourse, and exhortations to protest. To describe  
themselves at the time, the SI wrote that their movement “can be seen as an artistic 
avant-garde, as an experimental investigation of possible ways to freely construct every -
day life, and as a contribution to the theoretical and practical development of a new 
revolutionary protest.”10
In 1956 Guy Debord and Gil J. Wolman published a user’s guide to détournement  
defining the different kinds of détournement : the minor one based on “an element which 
has no importance in itself  . . . a press clipping, a commonplace photograph  . . . ” and 
“the deceptive one, based on an intrinsically significant element, which derives a differ -
ent scope from the new context.”11
Extensively détournés  works are a composition of several deceptive and minor 
détournements .
The Movement’s members formulated different laws for détournement . Without 
describing all these laws, such a specific and precise classification alludes to the necessity 
for the SI to organize their actions against the bourgeoisie and intellectuals at large by 
proposing a list of commitments and clear methodologies to reach their goals.
Debord, in his user’s guide to détournement , explains each of these laws. We can refer 
to the first one as an example. “ It is the most distant detourned element which contributes most 
sharply to the overall impression, and not the elements that directly determine the nature of this 
impression.”12 For example, in a metagraph13 relating to the Spanish Civil War the phrase 
with the most distinctly revolutionary sense is a fragment from a lipstick ad: “Pretty lips 
are red.”
On the other hand, this precise ontology of methods and possibilities to destabilize 
entrenched society raises the question of exclusion. The SI were too often excluding 
themselves in order to protect themselves from being bought out, exploited, and weak -
ened by any form of misinterpretation. It is most likely the ultra-détournement  operating 
in everyday social life, the construction of situations and the nature of the ultimate goal 
of the SI’s activities that gave rise to aggressive exclusion. In fact, over the course of its 
history, there were approximately 70 members. However, due to the frequent expulsions, 
only 10 to 20 members were part of the movement at any one time. In 1972, the SI 
movement had only two remaining members: Gianfranco Sanguinetti and Guy Debord. 
The political situation in the aftermath of May ‘68 in France, and the state of political 
upheaval in Italy led Debord to officially dissolve the SI. This dissolution was less the 
consequence of its internal disputes than of its external failure.
The political, artistic and personal position of an “assault on bourgeois culture,” 
an assault which is invariably both superficially scandalous and notoriously 
superficial, condemns itself to the anonymity of peripheral opposition. It was 
this precarious condition involving alternate forms of paralysis which the SI 
both described and fell victim to.14
389
DÉTOURNEMENT AS A PREMISE IN REMIXDissemination of the  Détournement
Even if this political and artistic movement failed to reach its goals, we should not 
underestimate the international repercussions it had in different cultural areas, with -
standing the test of time. One of the most famous documentary filmmakers, Jean Rouch, 
had been influenced by the Surrealist movement and the SI and disseminated their 
anarchist ideas in his teaching all over the world. In the field of visual anthropology, he 
took a prominent role by questioning the relationship between fiction and documentary 
as two complementary approaches. He introduced a poetic slant to a descriptive tech -
nique to convey the realities of the otherness. Within this methodology he promoted 
the production of “worrying object:”15 or genre-breaking film, neither part of the fiction 
register nor the documentary style. It was his way to force students and scholars to rede -
fine their own position toward the observed group of people filmed and toward the 
discipline with its implicit rules.
In fact, as the SI would suggest, having fun, enjoying oneself and laughing or even 
deriding everyday situations, were part of the everyday agenda of these practitioners. 
Based on these beliefs, one of Jean Rouch’s pleasures, in his role as an educator, was to 
transmit his knowledge and experience while creating a situation in which laughing was 
the first priority when faced with a new or complex situation. He disseminated this peda -
gogical agenda around the world—in the United States, Japan, Mexico, and in France, 
where he founded a PhD in visual anthropology. This courageous and revolutionary 
approach (for instance, including filmic elements in a doctoral anthropology course 
around 1975) was rooted in the idea of democratizing the power of creation, introducing 
students to sensible forms of the appropriation of knowledge, and to view and discover 
the real by recreating it. Rouch always referred to détournement  as an everyday basic 
activity, and as a way of seeing. Students should be aware of their capacities to produce 
queer objects16 as he did, by producing films questioning traditional academic classifica -
tions. The goal was to blur the boundaries between disciplines and subjects in order to 
question the act of creation and to put into circulation objects strange enough never to 
be truly classifiable. One example Rouch provided was the scandal provoked by the 
screening of his film Mad Masters  at the Museum of Man in 1955. This documentary 
about Hauka possession dances portrayed the undermining colonialist power, the politi -
cal domination, and the violence it exerted on the population. After Marcel Griaule 
asked Rouch in public to destroy the film, the only one who took to his defense was Luc 
de Heusch, also named Luc Zangrie, who took part in Cobra activities, as a writer and 
filmmaker. He openly defended Rouch’s film for its singular vision and its powerful state -
ment about society. It’s likely that Luc de Heusch had quickly understood the persuasive 
discourse and the necessity of really questioning the repercussions and consequences of 
colonialism, and the need to position them within an artistic answer. Mad Masters  
received a prize at the Mostra of Venice in 1957.
By recalling the links between activist movements and academic activities, I under -
line the fact that détournement  became a mindset, a dynamic, a loyalty to a revolutionary 
dimension outside of any political movement.
Rouch, inspired by this dynamic based on controversial activities claimed to be an 
anarchist and this dimension was crucial to him. He often told his students that he never 
took part in a vote. He felt that this strong position was rooted not in an artistic desire 
or in intellectual aesthetics but in his own childhood experiences, his relationship with 
his mother and also his experiences of the war: “He speaks of his memories in the womb 
390
N. WANONOusing the image of a lover’s separation, a carnal separation, a separation that would 
structure the rest of his life  . . . 24 years of heaven between two bouts of Hell.”17 Or as 
he also said,
We were witnesses to the defeat, to the landslide of the French army, which was 
supposed to be the best in the world. At this moment, something happened in 
my life: I couldn’t believe in anything, either in my father, or my professors, in 
God, in Freud, in Marx  . . . Nothing. It was the end  . . . I was no longer answer -
able to my society  . . . that’s how it all began on a beautiful day in May  . . . 18
These declarations were part of our training; the spirit of our work was imbued with the 
values and methods of the SI. Rouch, by his permanent questioning, has most of the 
time been a source of mistrust for his colleagues. If we recall the political and social 
environment of this period in France, inviting people to employ the détournement  as a 
pertinent reaction toward the system, was still at the margin of society and perceived as 
a kind of violence against the official mise-en-scène  of the political realm.
At the Margins of La Société du Spectacle?
For SI, “there is no Situationist art, only Situationist uses of art”19 The SI used 
détournement  in films, art, and graphics for their journal and in posters that “hijacked” 
comics during the events of May ‘68. Plagiarism was both the source and the meaning 
of the original work, which was subverted to create a new work. The ideas behind the 
concept, the methodology, the actions, which were part of the détournement , drove peo -
ple to denounce directly The Society of the Spectacle. Debord wrote extensively on this 
theme in a book published in 1967 and in a film, La Société du Spectacle , released in 1973. 
Both declared:
The spectacle presents itself simultaneously as society itself, as a part of society, 
and as a means of unification . As a part of society, it is ostensibly the focal point 
of all vision and all consciousness. But due to the very fact that this sector is 
separate , it is in reality the domain of delusion and false consciousness: the 
unification it achieves is nothing but an official language of universal 
separation.
The spectacle is not a collection of images; it is a social relation between people 
that is mediated by images.20
The inspirational values and revolutionary visual messages found everywhere from the 
walls of May ‘68 to the Internet have become part of a global culture. SI might have said, 
“our ideas are now commonplace, in all of our minds.”21 After May ‘68, this revolution -
ary attitude fighting against political consensus with artistic means spread all over the 
world and particularly in Europe with the punk movement. We choose to analyze this 
moment through the Sex Pistols who took advantage of the détournement  methodology 
to reach their goals in conservative English society in the 1970s.
It is probably in the punk movement that we find the most obvious public connection 
with the SI. In the aftermath of May ‘68, the Sex Pistols was one of the first punk bands 
to fully take advantage of society’s political and sociological weaknesses. In the lyrics to 
the song “Anarchy in the UK,” the band refers explicitly to the Mouvement Populaire de 
391
DÉTOURNEMENT AS A PREMISE IN REMIXLibération de l’Angola , the Ulster Defence Association and the Irish Republican Army. 
For the younger generation, these lyrics introduced revolutionary ideas as the product 
of revolutionary political movements. By giving them a voice the group reintroduced 
the challenges of these struggles: leaving the peripheral to become part of the central 
sphere. Interestingly enough was the commercial success of the songs, and the album 
Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s The Sex Pistols .22 Jamie Reid designed this famous LP . 
Graphically, his cut-and-paste collage style clearly referred to an aesthetic détournement  
process as it obviously reveals the edges of juxtaposed images, and uses the official por -
trait of the Queen with a safety pin on her mouth, as if to repossess her as a symbol for 
the punk movement. His work was quite provocative from an aesthetic point of view in 
opposition to the more harmonious codes prevailing in graphic design at the time, but 
also from a political point of view.23 If for the Situationists commercialization was not 
part of the agenda, for this band the financial aspect and the commercialization of their 
albums were integral to their success. Even if traditional English society was heavily 
critical of their lyrics, the album, banned from the official distribution circuit, was widely 
sold in alternative distribution networks. For the Situationists, the links between the 
proletariat and students were crucial to their political struggles, for the Sex Pistols their 
controversial positions, their public “offenses” (for instance, on TV shows) urged the 
workers in the vinyl pressing plant to go on strike, refusing to create their records for 
“moral reasons.”24
“Anarchy in the UK” opened the door to a type of protest holding radical and  
provocative positions in Thatcher’s Britain. They pursued their destabilization of the 
prevailing values of English society by asserting, in “God Save the Queen,” “that the 
function of sacred thought has been taken over by ideology; and by challenging in 
“Pretty Vacant,” the cult of the image; and finally, in “Holidays in the Sun,” by demand -
ing the right to ‘make history now’.”25 If one can believe their manager Malcolm 
McLaren, who once told Melody Maker  that “it’s wonderful to use situationism in rock 
‘n’ roll,” the connection between the Sex Pistols and the SI is solidified.26
The questions we could raise after the comparison of this musical phenomena in 
regard to The Society of the Spectacle and the power of détournement  is: Where are the 
margins in a time of digital globalization? If for the SI the confrontation within society 
was crucial as they always reinvented new forms of contestation, what could be the 
characteristics of a marginal opposition now? The CopyLeft movement, the Hackers’ 
strategies are, on some level, part of the global arena as dub or remix are part of the 
media industry and The Society of the Spectacle. Since we cannot step out of the digital 
universe and go back to the analog system in order to protect and locate our creation as 
an outsider to prolong the détournement  process, we must focus on our capacities to cre -
ate and produce detourned objects, thus questioning and challenging the politics in our 
respective domains, and specifically in the academic system.
The Remix as Détournement
The idea of détournement , has played an important role since 1970 in music, media, arts, 
and the creative industries overall.
Creating and disseminating songs, lyrics, and pictures that condemn The Society of 
the Spectacle is commonplace, and the artists referring to the movement and philosophy 
are numerous—Hackers, Free Software and Adbusters, among others. The complexity  
of the situation is not to define whether the references to the SI or  détournement  are true, 
392
N. WANONOhonest, or accurate but to underline how the globalization process and the media indus -
try are now exploiting all these elements, which originally came from the countercul -
ture. The question raised by these creative industries focus on the role and place of such 
dissident production. If for the SI their productions should produce a confrontation or 
even a destabilization between the marginal artistic forms of expression and the main -
stream art production, how then can this opposition be reframed in a digital age where 
margins are quickly mainstreamed through the cultural jamming that gained traction in 
a saturated media environment?
As a student, trained within this détournement  spirit, I realized progressively that the films 
I produced were part of The Society of the Spectacle27 and I was invited to fight against this 
from the early days of my training with Rouch. In order to keep this heritage alive and to 
favor the transmission of this important spirit, I decided to conduct research on digital tech -
nologies and more specifically on programming languages to see how we could keep control 
of the singularity observed on the field without being trapped by the standardization process. 
As Rouch might have put it, “there is no such thing as an arbitrary objective.”28
During this research, I realized how remix could refer to the SI as a source of inspira -
tion, with its own rules, its specific political agenda, and its own means of expression. 
One of the first people I read on this subject was Lev Manovich, with his book The 
Language of New Media .29
By trying to explain and to analyze the definition and function of new media in early 
2001, Manovich took his inspiration from Dziga Vertov, one of Jean Rouch’s totemic 
ancestors,30 and his film Man with a Movie Camera . Manovich explained the different 
types of values upheld in his editing technique: for instance, one linked to the process 
with a temporal aspect, whereas another utilized superimposition of different images or 
multiple screens. He pursues his reasoning by presenting Vertov as the filmmaker who 
conceived the first database of city life in 1920, a database of film techniques, and a 
database of new operations of visual epistemology. “Film can overcome its indexical 
nature, by presenting the viewer with objects that never existed in reality  . . . . It is also 
a database of new interface operations which together aim to go beyond simple human 
navigation through a physical space.”31
As soon as I captured the capacities of the language of programming, I realized this 
new language could be a powerful détournement  tool as well as a creative language, once 
we had mastered it. It was clear that programming languages could also be the best 
method and the most effective system for the standardization of representations and 
their rapid dissemination.
Marcos Novak, a digital artist creating “liquid architecture” environments, explained 
how to create, to shape reasoning as Da Vinci might have done. He would say, “If your 
reasoning is right then you can shape it.”32 He was inspired by Garcia Lorca’s concept of 
the duende , and he invited his students to create and to put into circulation what could 
be called “queer objects.” In this programming language class, far away from the French 
Surrealist movement, far away from any documentary film questions, there was the same 
spirit, the same motivation as with Rouch almost 20 years earlier.
Novak quickly concluded that creation was not the main purpose or even the goal of 
the training and production. The dynamic was to prolong what had been done: the focus 
was on the action not the author, students didn’t invest in posing as creators or artists 
with an inspirational spirit, nor to build a career as the creators of a new form—the goal 
was to focus on the interpretation, understanding, conception, and all other elements 
pertaining to producing and shaping lines of inquiry, becoming more conscious of the 
393
DÉTOURNEMENT AS A PREMISE IN REMIXmultiplicity of realities. The strength had to be in creating new forms from preexisting 
elements. In this way the students abandoned their private dreams of conceiving per -
sonal creations, in favor of investing in the idea of repetition, recreation, and transfor -
mation. Progressively, Marcos Novak invited his students to slip into the world of remix, 
on the border between the actualization of the SI and the achievement of The Society 
of the Spectacle.
These examples show how the notion of détournement  linked different political situa -
tions, cultural surroundings, social productions, and technical systems in a very subtle way.
As we said and probably for the SI themselves, the question of the original versus the 
copy is not the challenge we are faced with anymore. The most important question is 
the topology of these expressions in the field of the détournement  and the counterculture 
in a time of the World Wide Web. If on one hand the digital technologies favor the links 
between the SI, the détournement  and the remix by permitting individuals living in 
countries connected to the Internet to produce creative and personal accounts and 
enhance their individual creativity and reactivity or consciousness, on the other hand 
we should accept that most of the production issued from these manipulations with a 
social context—Facebook, T witter, YouTube or with media context like Photoshop and 
After Effects—encourage the standardization of the message. “The shift to digital ena -
bles the development of media software—but it does not constrain the directions in 
which it already evolved and continues to evolve.”33
In fact, the détournement  and the remix have also largely been detourned by the adver -
tising industry or the newspaper business as an effective commercial technic, losing its 
political dimension.
As Manovich explains in Software Takes Command  interview:
We are much more aware of the multiplicity of societies and subcultures, and 
how the same technologies are used very differently in different places by dif -
ferent people. Think of all uses of Internet, from selling things and collecting 
data about consumers to organizing resistance and protests, to acting as the only 
publishing outlet for academics in many countries that do not have academic 
publishing houses.34
In order to capture the détournement  spirit in times when software takes command we 
can refer to the work of Jenkins who, like Manovich, has an optimistic approach of the 
new landscape created by a young generation of active producers and skilled manipula -
tors of program meanings, as nomadic poachers constructing their own culture from 
borrowed materials, as an alternative social community defined through its cultural 
preferences and consumption practices. Jenkins, in his book, Textual Poachers ,35 proposed 
an ethnographic account of the media fan community, its interpretive strategies, its 
social institutions and cultural practices, and its troubled relationship to the mass media 
and consumer capitalism.
In The Practice of Everyday Life , Michel de Certeau36 demonstrates how mass media 
uses tactics and strategies to poach upon the marketability of consumable goods. This in 
turn encourages practices of détournement , tricking consumers with false promises.
In our societies, where media, economy, and social relations all run on software, any 
investigation of code, software architectures, or interfaces is only valuable if it helps us 
to understand how these technologies are reshaping societies and individuals, and how 
our imaginations could détourne  it in order to keep control of our creative capacities.
394
N. WANONONotes
 1 Constant Nieuwenhuys and Guy Debord, “The Amsterdam Declaration 1958,” trans. Paul Hammond, 
Internationale Situationniste  bulletin no. 2, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/is2.html (accessed March 
24, 2014).
 2 Here is an excerpt of the text signed by Khatib, Korun, Debord, Platschek, Pinot-Gallizio and Jorn:
Vanish, art critics, partial, incoherent and divided imbeciles! In vain do you stage the spectacle 
of a fake encounter. You have nothing in common but a role to cling to; you are only in this 
market to parade one of the aspects of Western commerce: your confused and empty babble 
about a decomposed culture. History has depreciated you. Even your audacities belong to a past 
now forever closed. Disperse, fragments of art critics, critics of fragments of art. The Situationist 
International is now organizing the integral artistic activity of the future. You have nothing 
more to say. The Situationist International will leave no place for you. We will starve you out.
Internationale Situationniste  bulletin no. 1 Paris, June 1958, trans. Ken Knabb,  
http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/action.html (accessed March 24, 2014)
 3 Text entitled “No More Flat Feet!”
Sub Mack Sennett director, sub-Max Linder actor, Stavisky of the tears of unwed mothers and 
the little orphans of Auteuil, you are Chaplin, emotional blackmailer, master-singer of misfor -
tune.
The cameraman needed his Delly. It’s only to him that you’ve given your works, and your 
good works: your charities.
Because you’ve identified yourself with the weak and the oppressed, to attack you has been 
to attack the weak and oppressed—but in the shadow of your rattan cane some could already 
see the nightstick of a cop.
You are “he-who-turns-the-other-cheek”—the other cheek of the buttock—but for us, the 
young and beautiful, the only answer to suffering is revolution.
We don’t buy the “absurd persecutions” that make you out as the victim, you flat-footed 
Max de Veuzit. In France the Immigration Service calls itself the Advertising Agency. The sort 
of press conference you gave at Cherbourg could offer no more than a piece of tripe. You have 
nothing to fear from the success of Limelight.
Go to sleep, you fascist insect. Rake in the dough. Make it with high society (we loved it 
when you crawled on your stomach in front of little Elizabeth). Have a quick death: we prom -
ise you a first-class funeral.
We pray that your latest film will truly be your last.
The fires of the kleig lights have melted the makeup of the so-called brilliant mime—and 
exposed the sinister and compromised old man.
Go home, Mister Chaplin.
 Internationale Lettriste: Serge Berna, Jean-L. Brau, Guy-Ernest Debord, Gil J. Wolman
  Internationale Lettriste # 1 (Paris, November 1952). Trans. Sophie Rosenberg http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sion -
line/presitu/flatfeet.html (accessed March 24, 2014).
 4 http://fresques.ina.fr/de-gaulle/fiche-media/Gaulle00143/entretien-avec-michel-droit.html (accessed 
August 14, 2014).
 5 If we go back to the original definitions as the SI did in 1959, in the Internationale Situationniste  bulletin:
DÉTOURNEMENT: the re-use of pre-existing artistic elements in a new ensemble, has been 
a constantly present tendency of the contemporary avant-garde, both before and since the 
formation of the SI. The two fundamental laws of détournement are the loss of importance of 
each “detourned” autonomous element—which may go so far as to completely lose its original 
meaning—and at the same time the organization of another meaningful ensemble that confers 
on each element its new scope and effect. This combination of parody and seriousness reflects 
the contradictions of an era in which we find ourselves confronted with both the urgent neces -
sity and the near impossibility of initiating and carrying out a totally innovative collective 
action.
Internationale Situationniste  bulletin no. 3 (Paris, December 1959),  
http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/detournement.html (accessed August 14, 2014).
395
DÉTOURNEMENT AS A PREMISE IN REMIX 6 Ken Knabb’s Bureau of Public Secrets, note 1 to Guy Debord and Gil J. Wolman “A User’s Guide to 
Détournement ,” 1956, ed. and trans. Ken Knabb, http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/detourn.htm (accessed 
August 26, 2014).
 7 Walter Benjamin, “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” Illuminations  (London: 
Fontana, 1968 [1936]), 214–218.
 8 “Formulary for a New Urbanism,” October 1953. http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/presitu/formulary.html 
(accessed August 14, 2014).
 9 “Our Goals and Methods in the Strasbourg Scandal,” Internationale Situationniste  #11, October, 1967, 
trans. Ken Knabb, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/strasbourg.html (accessed August 26, 2014).
10 “The Situationists and the New Forms of Action in Art and Politics,” June 1963, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/
sionline/si/newforms.html (accessed August 14, 2014).
11 Les Lèvres Nues  #8 (May 1956), Revue trimestrielle Bruxelles no. 10–12 (September 1958) Rédactio 
Marcel Mariën Editeur responsable Marcel Mariën, translated by Ken Knabb from the Situationist 
International Anthology  (Revised and Expanded Edition, 2006) http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/presitu/
usersguide.html (accessed August 26, 2014).
12 Ibid.
13 The “metagraph,” a genre developed by the Lettrists, is a sort of collage with largely textual elements.
14 David Jacobs and Christophe Winks, At Dusk: The Situationist Movement in Historical Perspective  (Berkeley, 
CA: Perspectives, 1975). http://libcom.org/files/At%20Dusk%20The%20Situationist%20Movement%20
In%20Historical%20Perspective%201975.pdf.
15 Objets inquiétants , an expression commonly employed by Rouch during his teaching either at Ecole 
Pratique des Hautes Etudes  or at the Cinémathèque Française .
16 Christopher Thomson, L’Autre et le sacrée: Surréalisme, cinéma, ethnologie  (Paris: l’Harmattan, 1995 [in 
French, my translation]), 284. I conceived creative modelization inspired from my fieldwork in Mali. 
Completely aware of the queer movement and its importance in the US, I decided to employ this word 
to underline the possibilities to produce representation characterized by their appurtenances to differ -
ent registers: media art, film, experimental cinema, algorithm, experimental visual anthropology. It was 
a way for me to affirm the importance of representation referring to unthought classification by 
Western society.
17 Ibid., 285.
18 Ibid.
19 Internationale situationniste  #7, Paris (April 1962), 27. Central bulletin published by the sections of the 
Situationist International, trans. Reuben Keehan, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/si/is7.html (accessed 
August 20, 2014).
20 Definition 3 and 4 from The Society of the Spectacle  by Guy Dubord, trans. Donald Nicholson Smith  
(New York: Zone Books, 1994), 5.
21 “Our ideas are on everyone’s minds” particularly those exploring the constant threat of boredom and 
commodification. Enragés et situationnistes dans le mouvement des occupations  (Paris: Gallimard, 
1968), 45.
22 Producers: Chris Thomas and Bill Price, label: Virgin Records, Barclay, 1977.
23 His work came in at number two in a Rolling Stone  magazine poll of the best rock album sleeves of all time.
24 George Gimarc, Punk Diary, 1970–1979: The Ultimate Complete Day-By-Day Reference Guide to Punk  
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994), 70; Jon Savage, England Dreaming  (London: Faber and Faber, 2005 
[1991]), 349.
25 Notbored.org, “Review of Exhibit of Works by Jamie Reid,” http://www.notbored.org/reid.html (accessed 
August 14, 2014).
26 Bill Brown,  Not Bored! Anthology 1983–2000  (New York: Colossal Books, 2011), 265.
27 The spectacle presents itself simultaneously as society itself, as a part of society, and as a means of unifica -
tion. As a part of society, it is ostensibly the focal point of all vision and all consciousness. But due to the 
very fact that this sector is separate, it is in reality the domain of delusion and false consciousness: the 
unification it achieves is nothing but an official language of universal separation. 4 The spectacle is not 
a collection of images; it is a social relation between people that is mediated by images. 5 The spectacle 
cannot be understood as a mere visual excess produced by mass-media technologies. It is a worldview that 
has actually been materialized, that has become an objective reality.
Guy-Ernest Debord, The Society of the Spectacle , Chapter 1 , 
http://library.nothingness.org/articles/SI/en/pub_contents/4 (accessed August 14, 2014).
396
N. WANONO28 It is a well-known expression often quoted by Rouch to underline his approach and belief. He employed 
it on a regular basis during his teaching at La Cinémathèque Française , where he taught more than 20 
years, every Saturday morning.
29 Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001).
30 In Principles of Visual Anthropology , Rouch wrote an article entitled “Our Totemic Ancestors and Crazed 
Masters.” Paul Hockings, ed. Principles of Visual Anthropology , 3rd edition (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2003), 
217–234.
31 Manovich, “Prologue: Vertov’s Dataset,” The Language of New Media , captions to Figures 149 and 243.
32 Media Art and Technology class, University of California at Santa Barbara.
33 “Software Takes Command : An Interview with New Media Theorist Lev Manovich, Part 1,” by Illya 
Szilak, December 16, 2013, HuffPost, The Blog , http://www.huffingtonpost.com/illya-szilak/software-
takes-command-an_b_4449999.html (accessed August 14, 2014).
34 Ibid.
35 Henry Jenkins, Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture , updated twentieth anniversary 
edition (New York: Routledge, 2013).
36 De Certeau, Michel The Practice of Everyday Life , trans. Steven Rendall (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1984).
Bibliography
Atkins, Guy, with Troels Andersen. Asger Jorn: The Crucial Years, 1954–1964 . New York: Wittenborn 
Art Books, 1977.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations . London: Fontana, 1968 [1936].
Brown, Bill. Not Bored! Anthology 1983–2000 . New York: Colossal Books, 2011.
Cutler, Carol. “Paris: The Lettrist Movement.” Art in America  58 (1970): 117–119.
Debray, Régis. “Remarks on the Spectacle.” Translated by Eric Rauth. New Left Review  214 (1995): 
134–141.
Ford, Simon. The Realization and Suppression of the Situationist International: An Annotated Bibliography 
1972–1992 . San Francisco, CA: AK Press, 1995.
——. Situationist International: A User’s Guide , London: Black Dog Publishing, 2004.
Gimarc, George. Punk Diary, 1970–1979: The Ultimate Complete Day-By-Day Reference Guide to Punk . 
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Hockings, Paul, ed. Principles of Visual Anthropology , 3rd edition. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2003.
Home, Stewart, ed. What is Situationism? A Reader . Edinburgh: AK Press, 1993.
Jacobs, David, and Christopher Winks. At Dusk: The Situationist Movement in Historical Perspective . 
Berkeley, CA: Perspectives, 1975, http://libcom.org/files/At%20Dusk%20The%20Situationist%20
Movement%20In%20Historical%20Perspective%201975.pdf (accessed August 14, 2014).
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture , updated twentieth anniversary 
edition. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Lefebvre, Henri. “Lefebvre on the Situationists: An Interview.” With Kristin Ross October  79 (1997): 
69–83.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Savage, Jon. England Dreaming . London: Faber and Faber, 2005 [1991].
Thomson, Christopher.  L’Autre et le sacrée: Surréalisme, cinéma, ethnologie . Paris: l’Harmattan, 1995.
29
THE NEW POLYMATH 
(REMIXING 
KNOWLEDGE)
Rachel Falconer
The innovators of the future will be the DJs of Thought, sampling, mixing, and spinning 
all existing ideas and thought-objects into ever-new structures. They will remix what we 
know into what we could know. They will show the Academy how to dance.1
Discipline-hopping is often the default strategy employed when negotiating the complex 
sociotechnical topics related to protocol. This boundary raiding was the natural modus 
operandi of the classical figure of the Renaissance Man, and continues to be so for the 
new polymath in the digital age. In this chapter, the polymath2—traditionally defined 
retrospectively as a particularly gifted individual who excelled in a number of disci -
plines—is recast as subversive remixer as she navigates the camouflaged control systems 
of networked knowledge production.
In this chapter, the new polymath is placed at the epicenter of the digital informa -
tional storm and her political traction is gauged through her positioning as the arche -
typal figure within remix culture, in which the agency of the act of remix—an integral 
part of contemporary knowledge production—is tested. Taking a cue from Certeau’s3 
championing of the subversive agency of the user in everyday practices, I position the 
polymath as “DJ of Thought.”4 As the informational remixer approaches the decks, the 
spaces within which the new polymath might operate are examined.
With the advent of creative and social capital, there has been an exponential increase 
in public participation in knowledge production and consumption. There is, however, 
a clear disconnect between traditional, hierarchical systems of information distribution 
and the emergent rhizomatic networks of flattened digital data flow. These conflicts are 
most evident within cultures of knowledge production. The mass dissemination and 
production of online knowledge endemic to the digital age marks a paradigmatic leve -
ling of the status of those who claim to be “in the know.”
The veneer of the utopian vision of the democratization of the elitist channels of 
knowledge transference by the early Internet pioneers, and the championing of the 
“participation society”5 is increasingly showing fracture lines. The stronghold of the 
historical institutions on the artifacts of knowledge is still very much in force, and is 
poignantly evidenced in the case of Aaron Swartz and JSTOR.6 This episode serves to 
emphasize the gaping disparity between popular open knowledge rhetoric and the harsh 
reality of the gatekeeping and control systems at play on the Internet. In this ambiguous 
398
R. FALCONERand unstable arena, the polymath must transgress the networked cognitive control sys -
tems at play. In the following sections, a brief overview of the figure of the polymath will 
be given in relation to remix culture and the various operational spaces of her activity 
will be probed and tested.
The Polymath
According to popular history, the polymath came to prominence during the Renaissance 
and was associated with the related figure of the—predominantly male—genius.7 During 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the idea of what constituted knowledge was 
determined by the development of systems of academic study and education. These sys -
tems were a way of measuring and quantifying knowledge, and guaranteed the polymath’s 
prowess. However, as more expansive historical 
narratives emerge,8 the figures included in this 
exclusive club broaden out to include Ada 
Lovelace, Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose, Cyrill 
Collard and Maria Gaetana Agnesi.
Nonetheless, the classical polymath remains 
fixed in a vacuum of prestige—his superhuman 
qualities seemingly impervious to our retrospec -
tive gaze. Today, the new polymath is an increas -
ingly maverick creature as her agency is inextri -
cably linked to her relationship with digital 
knowledge production and distribution and the 
operational systems that control its flux and flow. 
Consequently, in order for the connection between the new polymath and the remixer 
to be made, the defining features of knowledge in the digital age need to be 
acknowledged.
The seismic informational shift generated by the digital revolution and emergent 
convergence culture,9 has changed the way we think about knowledge ecologies. This is 
seen in the proliferation of technologies providing platforms for the homogenous dis -
semination of data and information and the phenomenon of the “hive mind.” In “Out 
of Control,”10 Kevin Kelly defines the nonhierarchical nature of the hive mind: “The 
marvel of ‘hive mind’ is that no one is in control, and yet an invisible hand governs, a 
hand that emerges from very dumb members.”11 The hive mind is associated with the 
rise of decentralized technologies such as peer-to-peer, Web services, and wireless net -
works that facilitate the exploding channels of user-generated content on the Web.12 
Wikipedia is often cited as the epitome of these systems of flattened knowledge exchange 
by hive mind skeptics.13 This swarm of networked collective intelligence forms the cog -
nitive landscape in which the new polymath must resonate.
The idea that knowledge production takes place exclusively in the head of the indi -
vidual is further challenged by the theories of “collective intelligence” by Donna 
Haraway14 and in N. Katherine Hayles’s conception of the “cognisphere.”15 In this 
updated version of the de Chardinian noösphere,16 Hayles positions the sphere of the 
mind as having “expanded to include not only the Internet but also networked and 
programmable systems that feed into it.”17 The meme is a clear example of such an 
expansive cognitive system,18 and Richard Dawkins argues that the meme has hijacked 
the very concept of an original idea. Internet memes are deliberately choreographed by See Chapter 36  for Owen 
Gallagher’s discussion on cre -
ating a critical remix video 
(CRV) that challenges utopic 
visions, and was inspired by 
a confluence of global politi -
cal events, including the Arab 
Spring across the Middle East, 
and the Occupy movement in 
the US and Europe.
399
THE NEW POLYMATHhuman creativity,19 he says, and it is in this act of cognitive modification that the new 
polymath’s agency resides.
This is symptomatic of the more general cognitive environment in which the new 
polymath operates— networked knowledge . David Weinberger defines this as knowledge 
that has shifted from the minds of individuals to become the “property of the network.”20 
This signals a change in the infrastructure of knowledge itself as it becomes more unsta -
ble, but increasingly transparent.21 Furthermore this shift directly challenges the old idea 
that universal knowledge is achievable and, as Weinberger suggests, this transformation 
is a straightforward acknowledgment of one basic truth we’ve always known “but that 
our paper-based system of knowledge simply couldn’t accommodate: The world is far, far 
too big to know.”22 This places the figure of the Uomo Universale ,23 in crisis, and the 
expectations placed on the new polymath need to be reassessed.
The crucial point to emphasize here in repositioning the new polymath is that the act 
of remixing does not constitute a drive towards the creation of knowledge in itself, but 
the new polymath uses knowledge to create new knowledge through transdisciplinary 
manipulation. This is more akin to intelligence, and therefore the polymath’s traction 
lies in the performance of her transdisciplinary intellect and not in the accumulation of 
knowledge in and of itself.
With this shift in emphasis, the new polymath’s identity moves closer to that of the 
curator. The contemporary curator combines anarchic free play with a responsibility to 
deliver a clear and artist-led message to the public. As the term curator is increasingly 
used outside the museum and gallery (picnic curators,24 curate your closet25 etc.), the 
traditional ideal of the curator as custodian of artifacts fades. Curators have become 
increasingly visible as “choreographers” or “authors” of exhibitions and have effectively 
co-opted the act of remix so as to render the narrative of the exhibition as sometimes 
equal to the individual works of art on display. Much like the nature of networked 
knowledge, this development privileges the exhibition itself (as a type of network), as 
the primary vehicle of cultural value. Florence Derieux has argued that the rise of the 
exhibition-as-event has reinforced this position, making current curatorial practice “no 
longer  . . . a history of artworks, but  . . . a history of exhibitions.”26
This blurring in the lines of identity is not new,27 but serves to demonstrate the wider 
crisis of the new polymath. The curator question is, in effect, the polymath dilemma—
where does a single identity of authority lie when the exhibition itself is the key operator 
in conveying cultural value? This distancing from the singularity of the polymath is due, 
partly, to the fragmentation of our worldview. The mass dissemination of information 
and the sheer volume of (often contradictory) knowledge available online, has warped 
and splintered our worldview into uncollectable and irreconcilable perspectives. By 
adopting the everyday tactic28 of remix, the new polymath hacks the fractured informa -
tional terrain, and it is through this optic that the figure of the “DJ of Thought” can be 
introduced. This parallel is indicated in the quotation at the beginning of this chapter 
and remains the thesis throughout: the new polymath must operate within the con -
stantly changing and contingent systems of networked knowledge in order for her voice 
to be heard. She dons a myriad of hats, employs a transdisciplinary strategy and is 
nomadic in her trajectory. The new polymath raids the boundaries between disciplines, 
absorbing and appropriating the cognitive and cultural material at her fingertips, per -
forming for the digital commons.
In the next section, the figure of the remixer and the act of remix are more closely 
examined in relation to the new polymath. While the specialist delves deeper into a 
400
R. FALCONERniche, often-isolated subject rabbit hole, the new polymath forms active, free associa -
tions within a transdisciplinary knowledge ecology. Much like a DJ referencing and 
assimilating a myriad of musical styles and beats, the polymath in the digital age is 
defined by her, “operative”29 act of remix.
Remix Defined
From its early roots in classic jazz and disco 
12-inches to the anarchic Negativland and the 
slightly more palatable Hype Williams, remix 
culture has spread like a virus during the online 
years. The term remix  originated from the late 
twentieth century practice of taking samples 
from audio tracks and recombining them in new 
and original ways. Traceable through a varied 
and sporadic history of cultural tactics, remix can be detected in the cut-up novels of 
William Burroughs, the practice of détournement  enacted by Michèle Bernstein, 
Dadaist Hannah Hoch’s photomontages and, most recently, in the artist and poet 
Kenneth Goldsmith’s practice of “uncreative writing.”30
From a theoretical perspective, remix as a discourse operates within the logic of Deleuze 
and Guattari’s concept of smooth  and striated  space.31 In A Thousand Plateaus , Deleuze 
and Guattari describe smooth spaces as rhizomatic, nomadic and anarchic, while striated 
spaces are arbolic, sedentary, and hierarchical. These spaces, both smooth and striated, 
coexist and together form a smooth/striated dyad. Sometimes smooth space is reterrito -
rialized and converted into striated space, while striated space is deterritorialized and 
converted into smooth space. Remix in this case is identified as a pendulum between 
deterritorialization and reterritorialization.
The Internet began as a smooth space. Over time, government control and capitalism 
began to reterritorialize the Net, converting the once utopic vision of it into striated 
space. Empires classically default to reterritorialization even after they have been  
deterritorialized—one only has to think of the (re)emergence of racism in decolonized 
countries. The primary mechanisms of striation in the context of networked knowledge 
production are the application of offline copyright laws to online material, and increased 
surveillance of information flow via tracking software. These two processes of reterrito -
rialization and deterritorialization are constantly in a state of flux and are played off each 
other in the act of remix in the digital arena. Here, the remixer is an agent who deter -
ritorializes the now “corrupted” Internet by challenging the mechanisms of copyright, 
and subverting surveillance strategies.
Reterritorialization is also evident in the new digital commons where the online 
public are implicated in the act of consumer remix—prosumption. The prosumer, a 
term first coined by Alvin Toffler32 in 1980, is a new class of public who operate as 
both producer and consumer. Whereas in the broadcast era there was a time lag 
between experiencing and critiquing, the digital prosumer simultaneously experi -
ences, likes and shares, rates and reviews, remixes and uploads the vast array of con -
tent accessible to her.
Prosumers include citizen journalists, and the use of citizen research to complete  
scientific research papers. Lawrence Lessig defines this as the reviving of Read/Write 
culture.33 Michel de Certeau supports the belief in this shift from producer to Nadine Wanono writes exten -
sively about détournement in 
Chapter 28  and Stefan Sonvilla-
Weiss’s Chapter 3  in Part I , 
History, also reviews many of 
these references to visual culture.
401
THE NEW POLYMATHconsumer and, in his seminal text The Practice of Everyday Life  emphasizes the poten -
tial for human agency in everyday acts. This strategy is evident in the act of remix 
employed by the new polymath and the prosumer.34 In direct opposition to Foucault’s 
panoptic control,35 Certeau disagrees that we are passive makers of our own destiny. 
Following this logic, we can position the polymath and the consumer as active agents 
of change. With the grid of discipline becoming increasingly extensive, Certeau asserts 
that it is important to employ everyday practices to evade the mechanisms of control 
and reappropriate the space occupied by the existing dominant order. Although 
Certeau is not specifically talking about the Internet, one can convincingly make the 
analogy, particularly when he describes the potential sites of resistance as “networks 
of anti-discipline.”36 These disruptive strategies recall the previously cited mechanisms 
of Deleuze and Guattari’s de/reterritorialization, inviting an association with Certeau’s 
description of the “trajectories” of consumers.37 Nowhere is the digital consumer more 
directly implicated in this bind than in the realm of social capital.
Blog as Canon
The blogosphere,38 and more recent micro-blogging platforms such as Facebook and 
T witter, act as potential sites of remix for the new polymath. Recently, the mobile micro -
blog—emblematic of convergence culture—has seen a fundamental shift in mobilizing 
the political reach of the Internet.39 The growing popularity of citizen journalism and 
news aggregator sites are testament to the demand for remixed counterpoints to medi -
ated mass media news feeds.
However, these platforms are contested genuine sites of cultural remix due to their 
relatively ephemeral nature and speed, as well as the associated lightweight connota -
tions attached to the often banal, bite-sized pieces of personal detritus circulating 
throughout the datasphere. The media theorist Geert Lovink asserts that blogging is an 
essentially nihilist exercise, a digital self-fashioning that actually negates critical engage -
ment, privileging self-promotion over analytic interventions.40 This view is supported 
by journalist Andrew Keen who is skeptical of the perceived freedom of expression 
afforded via the blog format: “If you democratize media, then you end up democratizing 
talent. The unintended consequence of all this democratization, to misquote Web 2.0 
apologist Thomas Friedman, is cultural ‘flattening’.”41 The author Nicholas Carr shares 
this position and states: “In the end we’re left with nothing more than ‘the flat noise of 
opinion’—Socrates’s nightmare.”42
However, David Kline declares the blog fertile ground for the aspiring polymath:
Rather than seeing the proliferation of specialty blogs as an indicator of the 
fragmentation of our society, we should see this trend as providing a way for 
citizen-experts to emerge and to bring together global constituencies in many 
disparate fields.”43
Indeed, the blog format is becoming more widely accepted as a way for public intellec -
tualism to be acknowledged.44
Cultural blogs are often reinterpretations of dense intertextuality45—a condition 
elemental to the polymath. For theorist Julia Kristeva, the concept of intertextuality 
replaces that of  intersubjectivity.”46 She says that we need to acknowledge that meaning 
is not directly transmitted from writer to reader, but instead is mediated through the 
402
R. FALCONER“codes” imparted to the writer and reader by other texts. As we are delivered a continu -
ous stream of online content—including blogs via RSS47 feeds—the fluid and customiz -
able nature of this data inevitably changes the way we read, write, access, and under -
stand text.
The artist Kate Armstrong48 locates RSS feeds as sites of potential generative, cultural 
remix. She perceives the automatic relaying of digital textual ephemera as generating 
new patterns of reading which morph the ontology of the RSS feed into a writer/pub -
lisher/consumer hybrid. In the spirit of the avant-garde, Armstrong identifies the cycli -
cal nature of this type of cognitive remix: “It is not only about remixing the world or the 
work, but remixing the world into the work, and the work into the world.”49 This self-
reflexive impulse is personified in the next section by the figure of the fan.
Fan Fiction and the New Polymath
Historically, the polymath was implicated in canon-building by preserving the value of 
the sources he was referencing.50 This also holds true for the DJ who is dependent on her 
ability to remix material from a recognized source in order to cultivate a fandom around 
her personal practice. However, as we have seen, the value systems and authority struc -
tures surrounding the new polymath are highly contingent, and the codependent rela -
tionship with the audience is considerably complicated by the decentralized nature of 
networked knowledge production.
The culture industry now operates on the assumption of the engagement of an active 
and potentially collaborative prosumer. In this context, the fan is as much an avatar of 
culture as a consumer. Fan fiction is a specific enterprise within fan culture that has a 
direct correlation with the new polymath,51 as it remixes references and narratives from 
disparate cultural content to produce unique, yet transparent homages to the original 
content. This reversioning of cultural artifacts reflects the activities of the new poly -
math and, although fan fiction is not a product of the Internet, the Web has proliferated 
this literature to proportions greater than those it could have achieved in print.52
For the new polymath, the phenomenon of what Henry Jenkins has termed the “inter -
pretive community”53 is crucial. Jenkins cites Thomas McLauglin’s54 challenge to the 
positioning of theory as an exclusively academic activity as he invites an expansive 
vision and cross-disciplinary approach to theory-making which includes the agency of 
fandom. The interpretive and generative characteristics of fan behavior mirror that of 
remix as fans appropriate and remix material from the object of their fandom in order 
to actively rework the material to suit their own needs and interests.
Jenkins suggests55 works of fan fiction are not just extensions or continuations of the 
original media material, arguing that these works may “include the active appropriation 
and transformation of the characters in a different historical context  . . . fan fiction is 
speculative but that does not mean that it is not at its core interpretative.”56 He suggests 
that the digital technologies available to fans have allowed for more serious public dis -
course and activism,57 echoing Certeau’s assertion that the power to resist dominant 
ideologies lies in the use of the very commodities imposed on them by capitalism. Here, 
Jenkins locates the resistance that Certeau describes when analyzing the media practices 
of ordinary people and provides a strategy for deterritorialization.
In “Voices from the Combat Zone: Game Grrlz Talk Back,”58 Jenkins identifies pat -
terns in Third Wave feminism which provide models for subsequent fan activism. For 
403
THE NEW POLYMATHexample, Clan PMS and the Game Grrlz movement actively challenged obtuse gender 
stereotypes in computer games.59 The participants’ claims to fan status gave them  
credibility and critical leverage within the culture industries they challenged. This 
repurposing of material is a key function of the new polymath, and one which directly 
interrogates the historical status of originality and genius.
The Unoriginal Genius
The literary critic Marjorie Perloff uses the term “unoriginal genius”60 to describe the 
paradigmatic shift in the figure of the author61 in the age of networked knowledge 
production. She identifies writers who exclusively use appropriated material in their 
work, citing the Conceptual poets Vanessa Place, Caroline Bergvall, and Kenneth 
Goldsmith as practitioners who “foreground the choice of source text itself, the very 
selection of that text and its context generating the methods that determine its 
copy.”62 The radical change in the understanding of what constitutes “genius” has 
been affected by new technologies, and she argues that a more accurate idea of the 
genius needs to focus on the individual’s mastery of navigating and disseminating 
information.63 In her terms, “moving information”64 is the manifestation of spreading 
language, online knowledge, and being emotionally affected by this process. She posi -
tions the writer as programmer, the maestro of conceptualizing, constructing, execut -
ing, and maintaining a writing machine. The poet and artist Kenneth Goldsmith is 
the poster boy of unoriginal genius as he blurs the lines between authorship and appro -
priation through his “Uncreative Writing”—writing that has been produced under 
constrictions which eliminate the author’s own creative control over the result. His 
methods include the use of readymade artifacts as art objects, translating algorithms 
and the championing of transcription. He asserts that even in a simple act of remix, a 
creative dimension emerges.
Even when we do something as seemingly “uncreative” as retyping a few pages, 
we express ourselves in a variety of ways. The act of choosing and reframing 
tells us as much about ourselves as our story about our mother’s cancer opera -
tion. It’s just that we’ve never been taught to value such choices.”65
Goldsmith’s ethos is echoed in Jonathan Lethem’s famous 2007 Harper’s  piece “The 
Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism”66—a defense of the history and creative agency of 
piracy and appropriation in literature. However, many have criticized both Goldsmith 
and other advocates of the unoriginal genius, particularly within the more traditional 
academic environment. The main criticism leveled at the open system of knowledge 
production is how to tell the good from the bad and, consequently, directly challenges 
the cult of the polymath.
Conclusion
This chapter has suggested possible ways in which remix can provide new contexts for 
the polymath to be acknowledged in networked knowledge culture. Kenneth Goldsmith 
suggests that in order for the new author to achieve recognition in the leveled creative 
playing field of the digital, the role of choice needs to be championed:
404
R. FALCONERSuccess lies in knowing what to include and—more important—leave out. If 
all language can be transformed into poetry by merely reframing—an exciting 
possibility—then she who reframes words in the most charged and convincing 
way will be judged best.67
In truth, we are all edging towards a polymath existence as we navigate and circumnavi -
gate broadening bodies of nonhierarchical knowledge in our everyday lives. In order to 
construct our own identity we are in a constant state of remix, cast in the almost ubiq -
uitous role of the new polymath. Following this logic, where the polymath has traction 
as the rules of the game are changed and authorship becomes a fluid, conceptual term, 
is questionable. This chapter has set out the conditions of the changing status of both 
the polymath and the value systems defining her. The dynamics of the digital age have 
placed both the institutions of knowledge and the idea of the polymath in crisis. The 
tectonic shift in emphasis from knowledge acquisition to knowledge transference means 
that knowledge is now the property of the network; maybe the idea of the new poly -
math/DJ of Thought as an individual is outdated and inherently contingent on the 
context of the specific network in which she operates? As David Weinberger suggests:
As knowledge becomes networked, the smartest person in the room isn’t the 
person standing at the front lecturing us, and isn’t the collective wisdom of 
those in the room. The smartest person in the room is the room itself: the net -
work that joins the people and ideas in the room, and connects to those outside 
of it.68
In order for a true act of generative remix to take place in knowledge production, the 
network itself must be acknowledged as the maestro or the new polymath.
Notes
 1 Adam Good, “Becoming a DJ of Thought,” The Real Good Adam  (2010), http://www.therealadamgood.
com/becoming-a-dj-of-thought/ (accessed August 4, 2013).
 2 A term first recorded in written English in the early seventeenth century from the Greek polymathes , 
meaning understanding, knowing, or having learnt in quantity.
 3 Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life , 3rd revised edition (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2011).
 4 Good, “Becoming a DJ of Thought.”
 5 Nico Carpentier and Peter Dahlgren, “Interrogating Audiences, Theoretical Horizons of Participation,” 
CM Communication Management Quarterly  21, 2011, http://www.academia.edu/1151340/Interrogating_
audiences_Theoretical_horizons_of_participation.
 6 Jack Schofield, “Aaron Swartz Obituary,” The Guardian , January 13, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz.
 7 Historically the polymath was considered to be a male construct, but Parker and Polock argue that the 
females of the time have been overlooked. Rozsika Parker and Griselda Polock, Old Mistresses: Women 
Art and Ideology  (London: I. B. Taurus & Co Ltd, 2013), 82.
 8 Ibid.
 9 The term originates from Jenkins’s Convergence Culture . He uses this term to refer to both the tendency of 
modern media to attract a much greater degree of audience participation than before, and the phenomenon 
of a single cultural franchise being distributed through and impacting on a range of mobile and distributed 
media. Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture  (New York: New York University Press, 2006).
10 Kevin Kelly, Out of Control, The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World  
(New York: Basic Books, 1995).
405
THE NEW POLYMATH11 Ibid., 147.
12 Common examples are: Wikipedia and Google, news aggregator sites such as Digg and Popurls, and 
cultural filtering sites such as Boing Boing.
13 Jaron Lanier, “Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism,”  Edge , May 29, 2006, http://
www.edge.org/conversation/digital-maoism-the-hazards-of-the-new-online-collectivism.
14 Donna J. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late T wentieth 
Century,” Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature  (New York, NY: Routledge, 1991).
15 N. Katherine Hayles, “Unfinished Work: From Cyborg to Cognisphere,” Theory, Culture & Society  23, 
no. 7/8 (2006): 159.
16 The Jesuit Pierre Teilhard de Chardin appropriated the term noösphere as an attempt to marry Christian 
theology with evolutionary theory. The emergence of the noösphere, he thought, was just the latest stage 
in our teleological progression towards the world’s culmination—the Omega Point, at which physical 
existence would cease. However, it is in its popular appropriation by the Internet community to define 
the idea of collective intelligence on the Web that noösphere is used in the context of this paper to paint 
the picture of the terrain of the new polymath. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man  (New 
York: Harper Torchbooks, 1961).
17 Ibid., 159.
18 The Internet meme is an idea, style or action which spreads, often as mimicry, from person to person via 
the Internet. It has a persuasive cultural value and is mimetic in intent. An examination of the full rela -
tionship between the new polymath and meme culture cannot be fully covered in this chapter, but a 
strong analogy can be, and is, drawn. See Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene  (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1989).
19 Olivia Solon, “Richard Dawkins Appears in Psychedelic Show Celebrating Internet Memes,” WIRED , 
June 20, 2013, http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2013–06/20/new-directors-showcase.
20 David Weinberger, Too Big To Know  (New York: Basic Books, 2011), xiii.
21 Ibid.
22 Ibid.
23 The ideal in Renaissance Humanism that it was possible to acquire a universal learning.
24 Picnic curator company: http://gothamist.com/2013/08/07/curated_picnic_basket.php.
25 Closet curator: http://www.ecouterre.com/keep-or-toss-10-slightly-unconventional-rules-for-editing-
your-wardrobe/curate-your-closet-1/.
26 Florence Derieux, ed., Harald Szeemann: Individual Methodology  (New York: JRP Ringler, 2008), 
8–10.
27 Historical examples of this are: Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro’s exhibition Womanhouse, 1972 and 
Lucy Lippard’s Number Shows, 1969–74.
28 Following Certeau.
29 Following Certeau’s assertion that subversion and generative acts can be achieved through “ways of 
operating” in everyday activities within already existing systems.
30 Kenneth Goldsmith, Uncreative Writing  (New York: Colombia University Press, 2011).
31 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia  (London: Continuum 
International Publishing Group Ltd, 2004), 523–551.
32 Alvin Toffler, The Third Wave  (New York: William Morrow & Company, 1980), 87.
33 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive Beyond the Economy  (London: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2008), 28.
34 Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life .
35 Foucault, Michel, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison , 2nd edition (New York, NY: Vintage 
Books; 1995), 33.
36 Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life , xi.
37 Ibid., 34.
38 A slang term for all the blogs on the Internet, the blogosphere is considered a defined community within 
the larger environment of the Internet due to the unique ways in which bloggers interlink with one 
another and with the wider Internet. First used as a term by Brad L. Graham in 1999: http://www.brad -
lands.com/weblog/comments/september_10_1999/ (accessed August 15, 2014).
39 T witter and Facebook arguably played a key role in the Arab Spring of 2011.
40 Geert Lovink, “Blogging, The Nihilist Impulse,” Eurozine , January 2, 2007. Based on a lecture given at 
Berlin Institute of Advanced Study, the Wissenschaftskolleg, Berlin, March 27, 2006, http://www.euro -
zine.com/articles/2007-01-02-lovink-en.html.
406
R. FALCONER41 Andrew Keen, “Web 2.0, The Second Generation of the Internet Has Arrived, Its Worse Than You 
Think,” The Weekly Standard , February 14, 2006, http://www.weeklystandard.com/Content/Public/
Articles/000/000/006/714fjczq.asp.
42 Nicholas Carr, “The New Narcissism,” Rough Type , February 17, 2006, www.roughtype.com/
archives/2006/02/the_new_narciss.php.
43 David Kline, Blog! How the Newest Media Revolution is Changing Politics, Business, and Culture  (New York: 
CDS Books, 2005), 130.
44 The role of academic blogging in scholarship is a much-debated subject and is an example of the systems 
of value this chapter addresses as part of the analysis of the status of the new polymath. Blogging is now 
recognized as a valuable part of the wider ecology of scholarship. For a more in depth debate please refer 
to “Accept No Substitutes: Blogging is a Valuable Supplement to Scholarship and Rightfully Challenges 
the Status Quo” by Rohan Maitzen: http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2013/06/25/blogging-
accept-no-substitutes/ (accessed August 14, 2014).
45 The shaping of a text’s meaning by another text.
46 Julia Kristeva introduced the “intertextuality” as an interpretation of translation of Mikhail Bakhtin’s 
concept of the “dialogic”—that is, the simultaneous presence, within a literary work, or two or more 
intersecting texts which mutually contextualize one another. Julia Kristeva, Desire in Language: A Semiotic 
Approach to Literature and Art  (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980).
47 RSS stands for Rich Site Summary, RDF Site Summary, or Real Simple Syndication and is an emergent 
standardized format that makes it possible for information of any kind to be sent as an ongoing feed, 
creating a world where cultural information is customized and spontaneous.
48 Kate Armstrong is a digital writer and artist who experiments with networked, experimental narrative. 
http://katearmstrong.com/.
49 Ibid.
50 Whether in science, the humanities, or the arts.
51 Fan fiction is literature written by fans of a particular cultural product, featuring the canonical characters 
and settings of the work in a new context.
52 Nancy Baym, “The New Shape of Online Community: The Example of Swedish Independent Music 
Fandom,” First Monday  12, no. 8 (2007), http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/  
1978/1853.
53 Henry Jenkins, Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture  (New York: Routledge,  
1992).
54 Thomas McLaughlin, Street Smarts and Critical Theory: Listening to the Vernacular  (Madison, WI: 
University of Wisconsin Press) 1996.
55 Jenkins,  Textual Poachers , 73.
56 Ibid., 86.
57 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture .
58 Henry Jenkins, “Voices from the Combat Zone: Game Grrlz Talk Back.” In From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: 
Gender and Computer Games , new edition, ed. Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2000), 328–341.
59 Ibid.
60 Marjorie Perloff, Unoriginal Genius: Poetry by Other Means in the New Century  (Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 2012).
61 A figure inexorably linked to that of the polymath.
62 Marjorie Perloff, “Poetry on the Brink,” Boston Review , 2012, http://www.bostonreview.net/forum/poetry-
brink.
63 Perloff, Unoriginal Genius , 45.
64 Ibid.
65 Kenneth Goldsmith, Uncreative Writing , 9.
66 Jonathan Lethem, “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism,” Harper’s  (February, 2007), http://harpers.org/
archive/2007/02/the-ecstasy-of-influence/.
67 Goldsmith, Uncreative Writing , 124.
68 David Weinberger, Too Big To Know  (New York: Basic Books, 2011), xiii.
407
THE NEW POLYMATHBibliography
Baym, Nancy. “The New Shape of Online Community: The Example of Swedish Independent Music 
Fandom.” First Monday  12, no. 8 (2007), http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/  
1978/1853 (accessed September 12, 2013).
Carpentier, Nico, and Peter Dahlgren. “Interrogating Audiences, Theoretical Horizons of 
Participation.” CM Communication Management Quarterly  21 (2011). http://www.academia.
edu/1151340/Interrogating_audiences_Theoretical_horizons_of_participation (accessed August 15, 
2014).
Carr, Nicholas. “The New Narcissism.” Rough Type , February 17, 2006. www.roughtype.com/
archives/2006/02/the_new_narciss.php (accessed August 28, 2013).
——. The Shallows . New York: W . W . Norton and Company, 2010.
Certeau, Michel de. The Practice of Everyday Life , 3rd revised edition. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2011.
Chardin, Pierre Teilhard de. The Phenomenon of Man . New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1961.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia . London: 
Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd, 2004.
Derieux, Florence, ed. Harald Szeemann: Individual Methodology . New York: JRP Ringler, 2008.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison , 2nd edition. New York: Vintage Books, 
1995.
Goldsmith, Kenneth. Uncreative Writing . New York: Colombia University Press, 2011.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the Late 
T wentieth Century.” Simians, Cyborgs. and Women: The Reinvention of Nature . New York: Routledge, 
1991.
Harvey, David. The Enigma of Capital , London: Profile Books Ltd, 2010.
Hayles, N. Katherine. “Unfinished Work: From Cyborg to Cognisphere,” Theory, Culture & Society  23, 
no. 7/8 (2006): 159–166.
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture . New York: Routledge,  
1992.
——. “Voices from the Combat Zone: Game Grrlz Talk Back.” In From Barbie to Mortal Kombat:  
Gender and Computer Games , edited by Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2000.
——. Convergence Culture . New York: New York University Press, 2006.
Keen, Andrew. “Web 2.0, The Second Generation of the Internet Has Arrived, Its Worse Than You 
Think.” The Weekly Standard , February 14, 2006. http://www.weeklystandard.com/Content/Public/
Articles/000/000/006/714fjczq.asp (accessed September 2, 2013).
Kelly, Kevin. Out of Control, The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World . 
New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Kline, David. Blog! How the Newest Media Revolution is Changing Politics, Business, and Culture . 
New York: CDS Books, 2005.
Kristeva, Julia. Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art . New York, NY: Columbia 
University Press, 1980.
Lanier, Jaron. “Digital Maoism: The Hazards of the New Online Collectivism,” Edge, May 29, 2006, 
http://www.edge.org/conversation/digital-maoism-the-hazards-of-the-new-online-collectivism 
(accessed September 13, 2013).
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive Beyond the Economy . London: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2008.
408
R. FALCONERLethem, Jonathan. “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism.” Harper’s  (February, 2007). http://harpers.
org/archive/2007/02/the-ecstasy-of-influence/ (accessed September 11, 2013).
Lovink, Geert. “Blogging, The Nihilist Impulse.” Eurozine , January 2, 2007. Based on a lecture given 
at Berlin Institute of Advanced Study, the Wissenschaftskolleg, Berlin, March 27, 2006, http://
www.eurozine.com/articles/2007-01-02-lovink-en.html (accessed May 4, 2014).
Mason, Matt. The Pirate’s Dilemma . New York: FP Press, 2009.
McLaughlin, Thomas. Street Smarts and Critical Theory: Listening to the Vernacular . Madison, WI: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1996.
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory . New York: Springer, 2012.
Parker Rozsika, and Griselda Polock. Old Mistresses: Women Art and Ideology . London: I. B. Taurus & 
Co Ltd, 2013.
Perloff, Marjorie. Unoriginal Genius: Poetry by Other Means in the New Century . Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press, 2012.
Schofield, Jack. “Aaron Swartz Obituary.” The Guardian , January 13, 2013. http://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz (accessed March 1, 2014).
Solon, Olivia. “Richard Dawkins Appears in Psychedelic Show Celebrating Internet Memes,” WIRED , 
June 20, 2013, http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2013-06/20/new-directors-showcase (accessed 
September 22, 2013).
Toffler, Alvin. The Third Wave . New York: William Morrow & Company, 1980.
Weinberger, David. Too Big To Know . New York: Basic Books, 2011. 
Part V
PRACTICE
This page intentionally left blank
30
CRISES OF MEANING 
IN COMMUNITIES 
OF CREATIVE 
APPROPRIATION
A Case Study of the 2010 RE/Mixed 
Media Festival
Tom Tenney
On February 27 2010, The New York Times  published a piece called “The Free-
Appropriation Writer,” in which Randy Kennedy reported on the controversy over 
German novelist Helene Hegemann’s alleged plagiarism, and questioned whether her 
use of another writer’s work in her novel was theft or an allowable form of “sampling” or 
“remix.” Kennedy defined the modernist concept of the creative writer as one of “the 
individual trying to wrestle language, maybe even the meaning of life, from his [ sic] 
soul,” and asked readers to use this ideal while judging the young novelist’s actions. Only 
after she was caught did Hegemann defend her appropriation as “remix”; however, she 
seemed to be portrayed in the article as a spokesperson for remix culture. Kennedy drew 
parallels between Hegemann and David Shields (whose masterwork of creative appro -
priation, Reality Hunger , had been released only three days earlier), placing them 
together on the same side of the “battle lines” between “a culture of borrowing and 
appropriation on one side and, on the other, copyright advocates and those who fear a 
steady erosion of creative protections.”1
What struck me as unfair about this particular article was not only the blanket por -
trayal in the media of appropriation as an agent of cultural erosion—note the heroic 
language portraying defenders of copyright as “advocates” while those who appropriate 
add to the “erosion of creative protections”—but also the tacit equation of two wildly 
different styles of appropriation. Kennedy’s article was just one circumstance inspiring 
the creation of the RE/Mixed Media Festival2 in the spring of 2010, an event that has 
become an annual celebration of appropriation in the arts, approached from the artist’s 
412
T. TENNEYperspective. As opposed to a conference, where appropriated art is only discussed, the 
festival seeks to provide a voice for artists in the public discourse surrounding copyright 
and creative appropriation by providing a venue for artists to demonstrate the legitimacy 
of appropriative techniques using their native language, i.e., the works themselves. The 
goal of the festival is to provide a response to the growing body of negative press and 
public opinion that equates creative appropriation with plagiarism and piracy. A primary 
tactic is to connect the contemporary cultural practice of remix to the rich heritage of 
appropriation in the arts.
What follows is a case study—a narrative inquiry into the building of the festival  
during its first year, 2010. As a practicing artist, a student of media history and theory, 
and a digital media professional, I have dedicated myself to promoting and inviting art -
ists into a contemporary discourse that includes sharing, appropriation and the cultural 
commons.
Background
Over the past two decades, the proliferation of new production, reproductive, and shar -
ing technologies has enabled authors, such as Hegemann and Shields, as well as visual 
artists and cultural producers at large to move easily from a modernist-metaphoric to a 
metonymic, multitextual order of representation through sampling and other appropria -
tive methodologies. Indeed, Lev Manovich has called remix the “dominant aesthetics 
of the era of globalization, affecting and reshaping everything from music and cinema to 
food and fashion.”3 Kennedy’s article seems to indicate a crisis of legitimation for artists 
who employ such methodologies. Concurrently, 
the culture industry seems to be experiencing a 
crisis of assimilation, an inability to absorb these 
works, creating tension between artist and indus -
try. In this way, it may be said that these tech -
nologies have been both good and bad for artists. 
On the one hand, they have provided uncompli -
cated and affordable means to sample cultural objects for the purposes of aesthetic and 
social commentary; on the other hand, this proliferation has also led to an increased 
scrutiny by those with a vested interest in maintaining the economic status quo of the 
content creators.
As a teenager in the late 1970s and early 1980s, I learned about art through the lens 
of punk rock, a culture in which it seemed as though everything—music, lyrics, clothing, 
and attitudes—was appropriated. Jamie Reid’s iconic collage imagery for The Sex Pistols 
was rooted in Situationist détournement  and The New York Dolls were simply the blues 
dressed up in red patent leather and painted with postmodern lipstick. In 1986, I por -
trayed a black-leather-jacketed Hamlet in Robert Wilson’s staging of Heiner Muller’s 
Hamletmachine , in which Ophelia delivered lines appropriated from Karl Marx, a pho -
tograph of the author was torn in half in a nod to Barthes and Foucault, and the great 
Peggy Lee hit, Is That All There Is?  was plunked out by a single finger on a piano. More 
than a decade later, I produced a series of midnight shows in a performance loft in down -
town NYC—musical send-ups of pop culture and Giuliani-era NYC politics. The shows 
were a collection of cherry-picked headlines and personalities, mixing and mashing 
disparate fruit from the tree of the cultural zeitgeist. The performances were guided by a 
ten-point manifesto,4 three of which were :The Ethics part of this book 
more thoroughly details the 
tensions Tenney alludes to here.
413
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVAL •Nothing is original, everything has been done before
 •The world is your playground, history your library—borrow from it freely
 •Creativity is placing two previously disparate elements side by side.5
These principles became the motivational force that led me to, and guided me through, 
the process of organizing the RE/Mixed Media Festival. What I discovered was not only 
a crisis of legitimation between industry and artist, but also one of meaning within the 
remix community itself.
Establishing Parameters
After recruiting three fellow artists—Emilie McDonald, Bruce Smolanoff, and Marie 
Mundaca—as coproducers, and creating calls for submission, one of our first tasks was 
to define a set of criteria for the work: Which kinds of art constitute “remix?” Without 
being too broad or too narrow in our definition, our primary objectives were to challenge 
the meanings advocated by mainstream media and interrogate the concept of “piracy,” 
and also to explore and celebrate the position creative appropriation occupies as an 
aesthetic practice in the continuum of art history.
In his influential book, Remix , Lawrence Lessig characterizes remix culture as “Read/
Write” (RW) as opposed to “Read Only” (RO), using the vernacular of today’s digital 
technology. He defines RW culture as one in which “ordinary citizens” have the ability 
to transcend the role of passive media consumers, and become active producers as well. 
Far from being a new phenomenon, Lessig portrays RW culture as a return  to the folk 
culture model dominant prior to the twentieth century when, due to the rise of tech -
nologies of reproducibility and repetition, culture became “professionalized” and RO 
Figure 30.1   Tom Tenney portrayed a black-leather-jacketed Hamlet in Robert Wilson’s 
1986 staging of Heiner Muller’s Hamletmachine  (courtesy of Tom Tenney)
414
T. TENNEYbecame the status quo.6 It is significant that Lessig 
characterizes remix culture as the restoration of 
something that has been lost, as opposed to the 
popular idea, reinforced in Mr. Kennedy’s article, 
that the sharing of cultural artifacts is something 
new, enabled by digital tools. In my view, artists 
who are being playful with technology today 
don’t seem substantially different from the amateur tinkerers who created the very media 
technologies that eventually led to RO culture. Further, creative appropriation in the 
arts has a long history, and in the twentieth century alone, appropriative practices were 
employed by the Cubists, Dadaists, Surrealists, Situationists, Pop Artists, and such con -
temporary artists as Richard Prince and Sherrie Levine, among many others.7 What 
differentiates “remix culture” is, among other things, the scale of production—the 
degree to which anyone can participate in reusing cultural objects for individual 
self-expression.8
Lessig’s portrayal of remix as “Read/Write” most closely aligned with the type of 
barometer we were reaching for, as it provided a characterization rather than a defini -
tion. Instead of holding each submission to a precise definition of remix, we instead 
decided to include work that we felt landed within the long historical continuum of 
creative appropriation, work that would help create a dialog between artists, scholars, 
policy makers, and audiences. Therefore, the parameters for acceptance became less 
about whether a work identified itself specifically as remix, and more about how well it 
asked the question: “What is remix?” The only questions we asked artists were ones that 
determined if their work fulfilled the most elementary definition of “creative appropria -
tion.” For example, we asked, does the work appropriate an already-existing work?9 and, 
does the relationship between combined elements create a new significance not present 
in each element individually? We began with the idea of remix as a question in the 
hopes that what we would end up with was not a polemic but a creative expression of 
our process. While planning the festival, we encountered and considered unexpected 
challenges dealing with ethics, responsibility, and meaning.
Ethical Considerations
An influential work in planning the festival was Bruce Conner’s 1967 film, Report , a 
found-footage collage of media coverage of the Kennedy assassination that uses appro -
priation to interrogate the mass media’s commodification of the cultural mythology 
surrounding the fallen president. I had heard about the film in 2009 after seeing A 
Movie , another of Conner’s film collages. Report , however, was unavailable for purchase, 
so in order to see the film at all, I had to make an appointment to view the 16mm ver -
sion archived in the Performing Arts Library at Lincoln Center. Report  is an excellent 
example of creative appropriation as practiced in late twentieth century experimental 
cinema, so when I later discovered a bootleg DVD of all of Conner’s films on the 
Internet, I purchased it without hesitation. After receiving the disc, we included Report  
in a YouTube collection called The Roots of Remix  that we curated in advance of the 
festival—a playlist designed to showcase a diverse array of appropriated art and 
cinema.
As far as we knew, our exhibition of Report  mitigated neither the artistic nor the 
market value of the film; our intention was to cultivate an awareness of the artist and See Chapter 15 for Byron 
Russell’s discussion of a RW 
culture that supports remix as 
activism and an activity of self-
expression.
415
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVALhis work, and provide a historical context for what we refer to today as remix. A month 
before the festival, I received an email from YouTube informing me that the video had 
been “disabled  . . . as a result of a third-party notification from Jean Conner [Conner’s 
widow], Trustee of the Conner Family Trust claiming that this material is infringing.”10 
While this action was certainly Ms. Conner’s right under the law, one wonders why she 
would object to a fan’s attempt to bring her late husband’s work to a public that may 
have never seen it, and one that, further, had little possibility  of seeing it due to its una -
vailability in the marketplace. My conclusion was that Conner’s demand was not about 
money, but about maintaining control  over the use of—and therefore the cultural mean -
ing of—the work; for once an object is liberated from the purview of the creator and 
becomes part of the cultural archive, its meaning and relevance are then measured by 
the public discourse surrounding it.11 Certainly, contextualizing the film as an anteced -
ent of remix culture couldn’t have been intended by the artist. However, there seemed 
to be an inherent inconsistency in restricting access to a film that was largely created by 
reassembling newsreel footage.12 Nevertheless, this incident raised the issue of owner -
ship from a personal, ethical perspective. Our feeling was that this kind of “piracy” 
respected the work, and could only lead to expanded interest in Conner’s body of work. 
Such an act can be compared to the work of collectors in the 1940s and 1950s who re-
pressed jazz recordings to preserve them from fading into obscurity.13 Similarly, my intent 
as a proponent of creative appropriation was to uphold such historical examples in the 
hope that they would serve as both inspiration to artists, and precedent in the argument 
for creative reuse of cultural artifacts.
Another ethical question we faced in the planning stages was whether to charge audi -
ences to attend. There is an unavoidable conundrum in setting an admission fee for an 
event that centers on work appropriated from copyrighted material. Of course, we 
wanted to recoup our production costs, but were unclear on whether doing so would 
create ethical, or even legal, complications. Perhaps more importantly, we had to con -
sider and preserve the relationship between remix culture and the gift economy. 
Ultimately, each and every work that we were presenting relied and drew upon the idea 
of a “cultural commons,” a principle that culture belongs to everyone and no one, and 
that commercial interests—those that would build a pecuniary fence around art—were 
destroying the ability of others to create. This is not to say that a work cannot simultane -
ously exist in both a market and a gift economy at once. Lewis Hyde articulates this 
dialectical aspect of the gift economy: “Even if we’ve paid a fee at the door of the 
museum or concert hall, when we are touched by a work of art something comes to us 
that has nothing to do with the price.”14 Eventually, we decided to keep the event free 
for the first year, prioritizing sharing with a wide audience over recouping our costs. This 
decision seemed to make the most sense in terms of both demonstrating our commit -
ment to the cultural commons, and maximizing the size of our audience, critical in 
launching an event of this scale.15
Artists and Collaborators
Because digital technologies that characterize the work of “remix culture” are, by and 
large, video and audio technologies, it followed that these constituted the bulk of the 
submissions we received. Finding works that represented the other arts required more 
effort and outreach on our part. Our objective was to present remix in ways that audi -
ences might find surprising or unexpected, throughout the 11 hours of festival 
416
T. TENNEYprogramming. What follows are descriptions of selected events16 that represent the over -
all experience, listed in chronological order of presentation.
Video Program: Remixing Politics and Culture
The first presentation following the keynote was a collection of six videos offering 
political and social commentary on contemporary culture and politics. Elisa Kreisinger, 
a remixer from Boston, presented a radical reedit of Sex and the City  clips entitled Sex 
and the Remix  (or, The Queering of Carrie ), Jonathan McIntosh’s video, So You Think 
You Can Be President  mashed up the Obama/McCain debates as an American Idol- esque 
reality show, and Kenneth Tin-Kin Hung’s In G.O.D. We Trust  was a stop-motion 
animation made entirely with images found through Google image search. Other art -
ists screened during this program were Desiree D’Alessandro, Seth Indigo Carnes, and 
Kat Green.
“Artists Only” Panel on Appropriation, Remix, and  
Copyright, Moderated by Deanna Zandt
Moby, a popular electronic musician, has been a vocal advocate for copyright reform for 
several years. At the time of the festival, he had recently launched a website17 providing 
independent filmmakers with free access to his music for use in their soundtracks. 
Figure 30.2   Jonathan McIntosh mashes up the Obama/McCain debate as an American 
Idol-esque  reality show in So You Think You Can Be President . Screen shots 
from YouTube (courtesy of Jonathan McIntosh)
417
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVALIncluding Moby in the festival drew a diverse audience, and his new site was a salient 
topic of conversation for a panel discussion among artists. Other artists who similarly 
advocated sharing and copyright reform included Elisa Kreisinger, Seth Indigo Carnes, 
Kenneth Tin-Kin Hung, and music journalist Christopher Weingarten. However, with 
so many artists on the same side of the philosophical divide, there was a danger of the 
discussion becoming doctrinaire, exactly the situation we were trying to avoid. For this 
reason, we recruited two artists willing to represent a viewpoint that favored stronger 
copyright protections. Kait Kerrigan and Brian Lowdermilk, two New York City per -
formers who run a website18 for composers who provide self-published sheet music to 
musicians for a licensing fee. Their stories provided an intelligent and measured coun -
terpoint to the others. During the 40-minute debate, both sides presented compelling 
arguments, with Moby referring to copyright as a “strange and antiquated idea,” and 
Kerrigan/Lowdermilk arguing for stronger protections for artists. Elisa Kreisinger offered 
the centrist viewpoint that copyright is “great when it protects—and it protects [the 
remixer] with fair use.”19
Man with a Movie Camera: The Global Remake
Perry Bard is a New York City artist who works on interdisciplinary collaborations for 
public space. Her Web-based project, begun in 2007 and titled Man with a Movie 
Camera: The Global Remake , invites Web users to remake scenes from Vertov’s 1929 
silent film, Man with a Movie Camera , and upload them to a database. She describes 
the project as:
A participatory video shot by people around the world who are invited to record 
images interpreting the original script of Vertov’s Man With A Movie Camera  
and upload them to this site. Software developed specifically for this project 
archives, sequences, and streams the submissions as a film. Anyone can upload 
footage. When the work streams, your contribution becomes part of a world -
wide montage, in Vertov’s terms the “decoding of life as it is.”20
Figure 30.3   Perry Bard’s Man with a Movie Camera: The Global Remake , invites Web 
users to remake scenes from Vertov’s 1929 silent film. Screen shot from 
YouTube (courtesy of Perry Bard)
418
T. TENNEYBecause the project allows for multiple users to upload the same scene, the software 
randomly selects one interpretation of each scene and then stitches together a new 
result for each screening, which is shown side by side with Vertov’s original film. The 
result points to a kind of remix that falls outside even the most radical definitions. Bard’s 
project represents a work where the concept of the author is not only thrown into ques -
tion, but must be applied to hundreds of artists simultaneously. While Eduardo Navas’s 
classification of “regenerative remix”21 seems to come closest to describing this type of 
work, it differs in that no single artistic vision is at play, but rather oscillates between a 
collaboratively created work  and an algorithmic process . This “algorithm-as-selector”22 
methodology could perhaps more accurately be called “generative” or “procedural” 
remix, with the artist assuming the role of programmer, and computer processes stepping 
into the role of author.
Extending Game Culture Panel
Moderated by media professor Josephine Dorado, this panel explored emergent forms of 
expression sparked by innovations within the game industry and gamer communities. 
From the release of tools to make user-created content such as custom avatars and maps, 
to the addition of filmmaking tools, the discussion focused on the large opening that has 
formed in digital media through which gamers are showing that they are not just passive 
consumers, but engaged media makers. Panel members included Michael Nitsche, Jesper 
Juul, Bit Shifter, and ILL Clan.
Video Remix Competition Screenings
As an incentive for participation, the films and videos received through our website 
submission process were entered into a competition judged by a panel of artists chosen 
by us—although neither I nor any of the producers were on the panel—with the winner 
to receive a cash prize of $500. We were delighted with the variety of films we received. 
Ten advanced to the final round of judging at the festival, a few of which are described 
below.23
Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize  by Diran Lyons mashed 
up Gyllenhaal’s characters from Donnie Darko and Jarhead , who are seen interrogating 
Barack Obama on the legitimacy of his Nobel Peace Prize. Of the video finalists, this 
was an excellent representation of a remix that employs techniques of radical reediting 
and recontexualization as a method of overt social critique.
Western  by Lili White was the longest and most complex of the videos presented in 
the competition. White’s film is a collage of found footage from spaghetti Westerns and 
original footage of the American Southwest. The soundtrack layers traditional cowboy 
music over soundtracks of Western films. Throughout, a voiceover tells the story of a 
filmmaker who dons a military uniform in order to gain passage to the occupied region 
in Palestine. The layering of multiple meanings serves to reveal a parallel between the 
American genocide of Native Americans, and the current political struggle in Israel and 
Palestine.
In Helping Johnny Remember by Ashleigh Nankivell, the artist used only one video 
as a source—an educational film from the 1950s about cooperation and sharing. The 
originality of the film comes from Nankivell’s use of Adobe After Effects to transform 
419
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVALthe children in the film, who complain about the title character’s unwillingness to 
share, into little monsters and demons. In this light, Johnny is seen as an antihero, a 
rebel loner—an apt, if clichéd, metaphor for the “misunderstood artist.” At the end 
of the film, Johnny exacts his revenge by firing laser beams from his eyes and decimat -
ing his classmates, who disappear in spectacular explosions, or shatter like glass into 
the ether. The film ends with Johnny smiling knowingly to the audience, as he con -
tinues to play with his toys alone.
Sweatshoppe
Sweatshoppe  was a multimedia performance collaboration between Bruno Levy and 
Blake Shaw at the intersection of art, music, and technology. The two developed soft -
ware to construct a 3D visual remix24 composed of found images, film clips, and vector 
shapes. The projected visuals were reactive to the electronic music being mixed in real 
time by the two artists on laptops, both wearing insect masks. The performance  
represented a remix of different media types and a blending of the languages of repre -
sentation. These included cinematographic techniques applied to layers of video, pho -
tography, and vector graphics, that responded to sound stimulus, all in real time, and all 
mixed within the metamedium of the laptop computer—a phenomenon Lev Manovich 
refers to as “deep remixability.”25
Steinski
Another notable remixer that we recruited was Steven Stein, aka Steinski, a music 
producer widely known for his analog tape collages in the 1980s such as The Payoff Mix, 
Lesson 2 (The James Brown Mix) with his partner Double Dee. We booked him as the 
last act of the evening, and he remixed music and visuals simultaneously, providing an 
energetic culmination of a long day.
Figure 30.4   Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize by Diran Lyons 
is a mashup of Gyllenhaal’s characters from Donnie Darko and Jarhead 
(courtesy of Diran Lyons)
420
T. TENNEYCrises of Meaning
Since our festival was, at least in part, a theatrical event, we planned to remix a historical  
event surrounding the first screening of Joseph Cornell’s film, Rose Hobart —an early 
example of appropriation in film (and a prototype of the fan-video). In the mid-1930s, 
Cornell reedited found footage from the 1931 film East of Borneo  into a 20-minute trib -
ute to the film’s star, Rose Hobart, with whom he was allegedly obsessed. Cornell origi -
nally screened the film through a filter of blue glass, and replaced the soundtrack with 
two tracks by Brazilian composer Nestor Amaral. Rose Hobart  premiered in 1936 in New 
York City at the Julien Levy gallery on Madison Avenue. Salvador Dali was in the audi -
ence and, according to Cornell’s biographer, he felt a moment of zeitgeist during the 
viewing:
Halfway through the movie, there was a loud crash as the projector was over -
turned. “Salaud!” came from Dali, which was tantamount to calling Cornell a 
skunk. Levy yelled for lights  . . . After [Dali’s] anger had subsided, he lamented 
to Julien Levy: “My idea for a film is exactly that, and I was going to propose it 
to someone who would pay to have it made  . . . I never wrote it or told anyone, 
but it is as if he had stolen it.”26
For the role of Dali, we enlisted performance artist Will “Master” Lee, who is well 
known in downtown Manhattan performance circles for his off-the-wall portrayals 
of the bombastic Spanish surrealist. The audience received no indication that this 
would be a reenactment other than a short sentence in the program and a prop 
movie projector fashioned from a cardboard box that was placed unobtrusively on 
the stage, in front of and below the screen. Cornell’s film played to a seemingly 
appreciative audience who, about three-quarters of the way into the film, began to 
take notice of the agitated rumblings from a man with a flamboyant mustache who 
sat among them. Suddenly, Master Lee exploded from his seat, rushed onto the 
stage, dutifully knocked over our prop projector, and launched into a postmodern 
remix of Dali’s tirade. Lee was sure to include all the original elements of Dali’s rant 
but added his own performative embellishments as well. Valmont Sprout, another 
performance artist, accompanied Lee on stage with an improvised interpretive 
dance.
After the initial shock, most of the audience realized that this was, in fact, all part of 
the performance. However, a few moments after Lee stormed the stage, a woman left her 
seat and approached me in the back—she was a representative from one of our partner 
organizations who had been peripherally involved in the planning of some of the festi -
val’s events. Sounding slightly panicked, she asked what was going on and whether I 
could do something about this interruption. I reassured her that it was all part of the 
performance, but she was resistant, and insisted that I remove him from the stage, before 
angrily making her way back to her seat.
This incident, which ended up being an unintended enhancement  to the performance, 
was also a reminder that the value of remix does not rely only on a consensus of defini -
tion, but on a negotiation of cultural meaning  as well. In The Wealth of Networks , Yochai 
Benkler wrote,
Culture [is not] a fixed artifact. It is the product of a dynamic process of engage -
ment among those who make up a culture. It is a frame of meaning from within 
421
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVALwhich we must inevitably function and speak to each other, and whose terms, 
constraints, and affordances we always negotiate.27
The woman’s reaction to our carefully staged stunt was marginally upsetting to me as a 
theatrical producer. However, it served as a reminder of the reasons for producing the 
festival in the first place. In order for free culture advocates—artists, producers, scholars, 
and activists—to challenge the culture industry’s monopoly on meaning, we must first 
be able to negotiate these meanings among ourselves. This doesn’t mean that we always 
need to agree on definitions, only that a plurality of meanings should be accepted and 
understood.
Another incident that reinforced this point occurred on the morning of the first day 
of the festival. While preparing to leave for the venue, I received an email from one of 
the judges of the video competition, a video remixer known for his satirical political 
video remixes, who sent a note responding to my request from the judges for their final 
votes on the video competition. The email read:
Are these all by a bunch of guys? Not a very good representation of the vast 
array of styles of remix videos that are out there at all. Honestly I kinda hate 
most of these, no hard feelings but these represent basically all the stuff I’m 
trying so hard to work against with my remix videos and advocacy work for fair 
use. Where are the vidders28 for instance? I would say my choices are  . . . 
(1) Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize
(2–5) I can’t stand to watch all the way through.
Hope that does not mess up your scoring.29
In reality, five out of the ten remixes in the competition were by women, or had a 
woman as a primary artist. Of greater concern was his accusation that the videos didn’t 
represent a variety of styles of remix. Aesthetic heterogeneity had become of such criti -
cal importance to me and the other producers, it had become one of our guiding princi -
ples. Finally, I can understand someone simply not liking a particular remix, or even a 
certain style, but was this artist really trying to “ work against ” them? And what, exactly, 
could that mean?
This reaction seems to be indicative of a crisis of meaning on a level deeper than 
simple opinion. The ten videos he was asked to watch were chosen precisely for their 
uniqueness and diversity of style, and although they may not have aligned with this 
artist’s practice—i.e., subverting media objects with the overt intention of achieving 
a critique of culture or politics—I would argue that simply transforming a cultural 
artifact is a creative act that also contains within it, inherently, an element of sub -
version. I believe this for two reasons: (1) a remix, regardless of its political inten -
tions, is the manipulation of a sign in a way that was not intended, subverting the 
original meaning and bringing about a unique expression of the work; and (2) it also 
constitutes subversion because, under the current copyright regime in the US, remix 
is an intentional act of cultural disobedience which asserts the agency of the artist 
within a cultural milieu that is increasingly prohibitive to this type of act. Looked 
at from this perspective, even the least political remix can become a profoundly 
political act.
Both of these incidents served to illustrate one category of complexity that the RE/
Mixed Media Festival continues to address—the internal disconnect among the ranks 
422
T. TENNEYof remix culture. As previously stated, it’s not necessary that every artist fall in line 
behind a singular aesthetic or political perspective. However, an acknowledgement of 
the variety of ways appropriation has been, and continues to be, used as an aesthetic 
practice may go a long way towards an understanding of its diversity of meaning in con -
temporary culture.
Conclusions
Since the inaugural event in 2010, the RE/Mixed Media Festival has undergone two 
subsequent iterations, each attracting more artists and audience than the last. The pro -
gression we have seen—not only in numbers, but in the variety and level of innovation 
of the artists—has been remarkable. With somewhat less of an emphasis on film and 
video, the 2011 and 2012 editions of the festival have broadened to include hacker/
maker workshops, interactive installations, sculpture, sound art, and theater. Panels 
have included discussions on remix in literature, hip hop as cultural intervention, and 
talking back to pop culture through video remix, among many others.
In 2011, Congress’s introduction of the SOPA and PIPA bills30 and the resulting contro -
versy had the positive effect of elevating public awareness of the implications of more strin -
gent copyright regulations, allowing us to continue to challenge hegemonic definitions of 
terms like piracy and file sharing, which resulted in stronger interest and support from audi -
ences and artists alike. These developments have certainly helped to heal what I have 
observed to be a lack of consensus on the saliency of remix as a cultural praxis. Additionally, 
as global market concerns have caused other nations to examine their own copyright laws, 
interest in sensible reform has become a worldwide concern. For the first time, in 2012, the 
RE/Mixed Media Festival hosted a total of 18 international artists, representing over one-
third of our total roster for that year. We continue to program on a “cross-pollination” model 
so that each year audiences who come for a specific performance or panel are exposed to 
several other ideas in the process. In our view, this is how social evolution occurs and culture 
advances—and how we hope remix and creative appropriation will ultimately be redeemed 
as a legitimate artistic practice in the twenty-first century.
Notes
 1 Randy Kennedy, “The Free-Appropriation Writer,” The New York Times , February 27, 2010, http://www.
nytimes.com/2010/02/28/weekinreview/28kennedy.html.
 2 The presentation of the name—RE/Mixed Media Festival—pays homage to V . Vale and Andrea Juno, 
founders of RE/Search Publications. Since the early 1980s, RE/Search has been publishing books on a 
variety of underground artists and countercultural trend—books that have helped shape my own aesthetic 
and to which my interest in remix owes a tremendous debt.
 3 Lev Manovich, Software Takes Command  (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 267.
 4 Tom Tenney, “Jarmusch’s Golden Rules v. Grindhouse Manifesto,” Inc.ongruo.us, May 1, 2010, http://
inc.ongruo.us/2010/05/01/jarmuschs-golden-rules-v-grindhouse-manifesto.
 5 This point was an unintentional paraphrase of Comte de Lautréaumont who, in 1869, wrote, in The Songs 
of Maldoror , “As beautiful as the chance encounter of a sewing machine and an umbrella on an operating 
table.” The phrase was popularized by the surrealist Andre Breton, and is misattributed to him in Jonathan 
Lethem’s February 2007 article in Harper’s , “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism.”
 6 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008), 28–31.
 7 Kembrew McLeod, Owning Culture: Authorship, Ownership, and Intellectual Property Law  (New York: Peter 
Lang, 2001), 126–145.
423
CRISES OF MEANING: RE/MIXED MEDIA FESTIVAL 8 Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom  
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 293.
 9 As opposed to a genre or style, in which case we’d consider it more a hybrid form than a remix.
10 Personal correspondence, April 30, 2010.
11 Benkler, The Wealth of Networks , 285–294.
12 Conner did not use footage from the Zapruder film, as is sometimes assumed.
13 Alex Sayf Cummings, Democracy of Sound: Music Piracy and the Remaking of American Copyright in the 
Twentieth Century  (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 35–62.
14 Lewis Hyde, The Gift: How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World  (Edinburgh: Canongate, 2007), xiv.
15 As this is not a sustainable model without major funding, it has changed in the interceding years. We do 
now charge a nominal admission fee for the festival, which provides access to everything at the event. 
No separate admission is charged for any single performance, exhibit, or presentation.
16 A PDF of the full program can be downloaded from http://www.remixnyc.com/2010-Program (accessed 
August 15, 2014).
17 Moby, Mobygratis: Music for Independent Film Makers , http://www.mobygratis.com.
18 New Musical Theatre, http://www.newmusicaltheatre.com.
19 RE/Mixed Media Festival, “T weets from the 2010 RE/Mixed Media Festival,” http://remixnyc.com/
tweets-from-the-2010-remixed-media-festival.
20 Perry Bard, “Man with a Movie Camera,” http://dziga.perrybard.net.
21 Eduardo Navas, Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling  (New York: Springer, 2012), 73.
22 Selector is the Jamaican term for DJ. I actually prefer selector to the American term as it’s both more 
descriptive of its function and more appropriate in its application to other, nonmusic, media.
23 All of the video finalists can be viewed at http://www.remixnyc.com.
24 3D glasses were distributed to the audience.
25 Lev Manovich, Software Takes Command , 267–277. Manovich defines “deep remixability” as the combin -
ing not only of media content, but also of the languages, techniques, and methodologies used to create 
their means of expression.
26 Deborah Solomon, Utopia Parkway: The Life and Work of Joseph Cornell  (London: Pimlico, 1997), 87–89.
27 Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks , 282.
28 Vidding refers to the fan practice of constructing new music videos from clips of a movie or television 
show. See Francesca Coppa, “An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work,” Camera 
Obscura  26, no. 77 (2011).
29 Anonymous, personal correspondence, May 10, 2010.
30 The Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the Protect IP Act (PIPA) were legislative bills whose osten -
sible purpose was to restrict foreign websites from providing illegal content. However, provisions included 
in both bills allowed for the removal of non-infringing Web content as well, including political and other 
forms of protected speech.
Bibliography
Bard, Perry. “Man with a Movie Camera.” http://dziga.perrybard.net (accessed December 30, 2013).
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.
Coppa, Francesca. “An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work.” Camera Obscura  26, 
no. 77 (2011): 123–124.
Cummings, Alex Sayf. Democracy of Sound: Music Piracy and the Remaking of American Copyright in the 
Twentieth Century . New York: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Hatch, Kevin. Looking for Bruce Conner . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Hyde, Lewis. The Gift: How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World . Edinburgh: Canongate, 2007.
Kennedy, Randy. “The Free-Appropriation Writer.” The New York Times , February 27, 2010. http://
www.nytimes.com/2010/02/28/weekinreview/28kennedy.html (accessed July 31, 2013).
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: Penguin 
Press, 2008.
Lethem, Jonathan. The Ecstasy of Influence: Nonfictions, Etc.  New York: Vintage, 2011.
424
T. TENNEYManovich, Lev. Software Takes Command . New York, NY: Bloomsbury, 2013.
McLeod, Kembrew. Owning Culture: Authorship, Ownership, and Intellectual Property Law . New York: 
Peter Lang, 2001.
Moby. Mobygratis: Music for Independent Film Makers . http://www.mobygratis.com (accessed December 
30, 2013).
Navas, Eduardo. Remix Theory: The Aesthetics of Sampling . New York: Springer, 2012.
New Musical Theatre. http://www.newmusicaltheatre.com (accessed December 30, 2013).
RE/Mixed Media Festival. “T weets from the 2010 RE/Mixed Media Festival.” http://remixnyc.com/
tweets-from-the-2010-remixed-media-festival (accessed December 30, 2013).
Solomon, Deborah. Utopia Parkway: The Life and Work of Joseph Cornell . London: Pimlico, 1997.
Tenney, Tom. “Jarmusch’s Golden Rules v. Grindhouse Manifesto.” Inc.ongruo.us, May 1, 2010. http://
inc.ongruo.us/2010/05/01/jarmuschs-golden-rules-v-grindhouse-manifesto (accessed July 18, 2013).
31
OF RE/APPROPRIATIONS
Gustavo Romano
Digital media makes possible not just the reproduction of material, but its manipulation 
as well. Instead of invariability, it offers perpetual mutation; rather than copying: remixing.  
This has introduced a series of reflections not only regarding the notion of originals and 
copies—meaningless concepts in the digital realm—but also regarding ideas such as 
authorship, possession, and art collections.
This text evaluates selected works from the NETescopio archive that share a practice 
of reappropriation and reuse, but employ it via different strategies. Some of the works, 
part of the collection, remix and recombine material to yield new creations; others refer -
ence the original source while creating a “free version” as its re-creation. There are 
others that manipulate material on the Web or websites to develop parody, or sabotage 
the sources’ messages. I will also explore artists who operate like collectors, turning their 
computer’s cache into a kind of involuntary wunderkammer , or cabinet of curiosities, 
along with other works based on the recirculation of information and interaction as 
necessary mechanisms for the creation of meaning. The artist’s role on the Web is trans -
formed from creator to “redirector” of information. What follows is a brief reflection on 
some net art pieces from the exhibition Re/appropriations .
Remix
The recombination of materials is a practice that, in the plastic arts, has traditionally 
been associated with collage above all in relation to fixed images, painting, or photog -
raphy. In the digital realm, however, when including the temporal element, this practice 
is closely linked to the notion of cinematographic montage as pioneered by Sergei 
Eisenstein. Montage, for him, was an idea that arises from the dialectic collision between 
two entities independent of each other.1 Couldn’t we envision as a kind of montage the 
remix of what browsers produce as they provide us with a constant mix of text, images, 
and sounds on our screens?
The digital realm, in addition, not only incorporates linear time—which in cinema is 
the stage on which that collision of meanings takes place—but also the juxtaposition of 
potentially infinite time and space as the viewer has an endless range of choices.
If the general public’s channel surfing has led to a kind of experimental montage crea -
tion thanks to the power of the remote control, today the television screen has exploded, 
as a result offering multiple viewing possibilities. Today screens connect us via the 
Internet to infinite elements of content that are remote and distant from each other, not 
only spatially but in meaning, generating with each click that “dialectic collision”2 of 
which Eisenstein spoke, now in potentially infinite directions.
426
G. ROMANOKeeping in mind the early context of cinema, works of NETescopio clearly are part of 
the cinematic tradition. Starting at the time when Web cameras began to proliferate 
worldwide—in almost infinite directions—the Multi-Cultural Recycler3 invites the public 
to take part in a voyeurism which is no longer merely passive or limited to the simple 
exercise of watching; it is geared towards intervention, and the mixing and remixing of 
the material that these remote surveillance cameras send to our computers. Selecting 
two or three cameras at random or choosing mixes made previously by another user, the 
Recycler  embarks on a digital process in order to offer the viewer a final image. In this 
project we find a double recycling effect: one is caused by the use of the cameras (which 
lose their surveillance function), and the other effect relates to the meaning of the image 
(which loses its documentary function in favor of one that is metacritical). It is in this 
strange limbo produced by the random remix of geographical locations that people 
unknown to each other still share a destiny in cyberspace in which they collide, super -
impose, and remain frozen in time.
Increasingly, keywords are used to govern and organize our daily lives. They have 
become a kind of language without grammar, without modalization, dissonance, or 
doubt. They are isolated names used to describe our environment, and even ourselves. 
youTAG4 offers us a device which, using the tags that describe the videos uploaded to 
YouTube as a starting point, allows users to suggest two words and generate a remix that 
superimposes the resulting videos.
The mixing of words becomes a war of meanings, and the video space is transformed 
into a battleground where no one meaning can triumph.
Reinterpretations
Unlike remixes in which materials are taken independently from the narratives, there 
are a few works which are based on the creations of other artists and which respect their 
organization in the same way that a musician reads and plays sheet music. Though in 
music or in cinema this practice is not only standard, but an actual tradition, it is not as 
established in the area of the plastic arts. Remakes, covers, free versions or even karaoke 
are somewhat distant concepts, which are associated with and introduced from other 
disciplines. Various concepts enter into play here, such as authorship, original ideas, and 
closed works. There are also various strategies used by certain artists in order to generate 
a “crisis” with these concepts in the digital realm.
There are artists who act as interpreters of other authors, illustrating at times that it 
is not just ideas but the way they are presented and their contexts that give them mean -
ing. Others who play a two-fold role, functioning as actors in territory foreign to them, 
recreating works in a personal way, are impostors who occupy, without prejudice, the 
author’s place, challenging his role and authorship.
These practices also evoke two processes in the digital realm: identity theft and the 
system of successive software versions, two issues which come together in the practice 
of open code software, where we see that its strength lies precisely in free access, simul -
taneous authors, and a range of different versions.
The term “remake” describes audiovisual productions that faithfully reproduce the 
plot, characters, atmosphere, and practically all the other features of a previous work. 
In theory, one of the many My Boyfriend Came Back From the War  (MBCBFTW)5 
remixes by Epstein and the new version of the well-known work by Olia Lialina could 
427
OF RE/APPROPRIATIONSbe considered a remake. In the case of certain works for the Internet, simply replacing 
image files under the same name leads us to a new version of the work.
In the digital world, on the other hand, the subsequent versions of software always 
offer us an improvement, better-quality graphics, and improved user-friendliness. 
Arguably, this is what we see in this mix of parody and homage to a classic work of 
hypernarration.
Second Life  is, by definition, a  second part , a second world, a second opportunity. 
While everything that happens there takes place in real time—the same time that is 
shared by SL (Second Life) and RL (Real Life)—the “now” offered by SL takes us back 
to something past, something we knew or experienced previously.
In this respect, the Synthetic Performances6 developed in SL make more sense as reen -
actments of performances previously carried out in RL.
Another characteristic of SL is the proliferation of multiple personalities, imposture, 
and identity theft. Consequently, it seems natural to us to see them change skin, chang -
ing from one moment to the next into avatars of Marina Abramovic ′, Joseph Beuys, 
Gilbert and George, Vito Acconci, and Chris Burden.
Reengineering
Though all remixing involves a change in meaning with respect to the original work 
there are certain works that wage decided attacks on the ideas conveyed by the originals. 
We will, thus, find works undertaking these attacks with tactics like sabotage, distortion, 
or aikido-like methods through which one uses his opponent’s own effort against him, 
revealing his weak points.
There are also other tactics comparable to certain living beings’ survival mechanisms. 
The ability to camouflage themselves in their environment, for example, has been 
developed by species such as the chameleon and some classes of butterflies to keep from 
being seen by both their prey and predators. We can also compare them to the ploy used 
by a legendary wooden animal: the Trojan Horse. The computer version being well-
known on the Web, Trojan Horses have surpassed viruses as a threat, mainly thanks to 
their ability to get into our systems by hiding inside other programs like viruses or 
memes, which are reproduced through a human carrier, who they use as a vehicle. 
Certain arguments are patiently kept out of sight, only subsequently exploited to achieve 
maximum “infection.”
As advertised, Reamweaver7 features all you need to instantly replicate any website at 
home, maintaining its design while allowing you to change any image or word you 
desire.
Various examples illustrate its potential applications: news pages from sites such as 
CNN, the World Economic Forum, the World Trade Organization, and the Republican 
National Committee, to mention just a few examples of pages that were distorted by the 
software which is also free and open due to its GNU software license. This distortion 
tool allows us to redress the balance between us and powerful companies or institutions. 
By taking advantage of the Internet, it allows David and Goliath to be on an equal foot -
ing and of the same stature. A webpage is just the same as any other webpage, and here 
all the huge differences which we would face were we to take on these organizations in 
the real world disappear.
The collaboration of Ubermorgen, Paolo Cirio, and Alessandro Ludovico cannot be 
described as a group or formal art collective as such, although it does resemble a “band” 
428
G. ROMANOin many ways. Their previous strike was an attempt to displace Google by reinvesting 
the money paid to them by Google for advertising in Google shares. In 2006 they 
planned a new action which targeted the largest online bookseller: Amazon Noir .8 The 
band dedicated their time to purloining books with copyrights protected by Amazon.
com, using a sophisticated technology encoded by supervillain and media hacker Paolo 
Cirio. They managed to gain access to all the pages of books for sale online, which 
allowed them to download whole publications and offer them for free on their website 
as material in the public domain on the grounds of an economy of shared property. The 
result was a legal contest with Amazon.com which was followed by huge online debates 
on the limits of intellectual property.
“Re-Collections”
Towards the end of the past century a new “continent” was added to those already known, 
a continent made of nothing but information, and which is in constant flux. The meta -
phor for the Internet is that of an endless sea on which the user is like a sailor who uses 
bookmarks as anchors in an attempt to grant some kind of ephemeral structure to a uni -
verse with no land in sight and no stars to guide him. Although we may know where we 
want to go, a voyage without any coordinates is a voyage without a destination.
This sense of randomness will be essential to our experience as travelers, an eternal act 
of serendipity which will take us from port to port, making us gradually forget the destina -
tion towards which we had embarked. To our surprise, these accidental encounters will 
have unexpected results, as vestiges of our days are stored in our computer’s cache.
Like a collector looking at his list of contacts on social networks, or like a tested seer 
looking for hidden meanings in the order of a deck of cards, the stars, or the image results 
on Google, the authors of this section’s works will salvage these vestiges, these unin -
tended information collisions, crafting unforeseen associations, circumstantial “bays” 
and unanticipated “lighthouses” to aid us before we continue our wandering voyage.
In I Wanted to See All of the News From Today9 Martin John Callanan presents us with 
miniatures of the front cover of more than 600 global publications on one webpage. The 
navigator is induced to plunge into this impossible collection, in this visual mass, which tells 
us a great deal about the surface of the news, and very little—if anything—beyond that.
In one way it suggests that this is perhaps the same pointless effort made by the pub -
lication itself, by each newspaper and each of its readers. The trapping, the realization 
today, of what happened yesterday.
People collect the most diverse items: fans, shark teeth, Barbie dolls. There are also 
those who collect friends on Facebook or T witter. The project My_Contacts10 invites us to 
intrude on the world of people’s contacts, and enter their respective pages on Flickr. Thus, 
we can take a look at photos taken by people like Bill Gates, Paris Hilton, the Dalai Lama, 
Marcel Duchamp, Osama Bin Laden, or George W . Bush. On the Internet, we can all be 
Hollywood stars, sportspersons, statesmen, or terrorists. And they can be our friends.
Recirculations
Information recirculation and joint authorship are not new concepts, but on the Internet 
they have found the ideal platform on which to function. The Web’s immediacy and its 
power to go around the world in seconds have allowed humanity to become connected 
at lightning speed.
429
OF RE/APPROPRIATIONSIn the field of art we have gone from taking turns, with exquisite cadavers for example,  
to the kind of instant negotiation, discussion, and collaboration permitted by a wiki. 
The exchange creates a networking behavior, which is now simultaneous and recursive, 
rather than just sequential.
We can define networking  as the promotion of social nexuses and the creation of two-
way communication tools made possible by the latest technologies. From this perspec -
tive we see that not all net art falls into this category, but rather only those works in 
which art ceases to be an “object” (albeit virtual) made by “artists” and instead becomes 
a kind of platform, a space, a meaning machine with parts being added constantly, 
depending upon the participation which it attracts.
In some cases the artist even tries to disappear, to become invisible, hidden behind a 
“collective.” In other cases this isn’t even relevant, as the artist adopts a role as a pro -
moter, someone who shines a light on a story in which nobody knows the end, or even 
the next scene. In others, the artist’s work seems to be inspired by Joseph Beuys’s idea 
that “every man is an artist,” as one is invited to participate actively and to transform 
himself from a user into a “networker.”
New meanings—in this case generated in an undesirable way—are the result of trans -
lation processes. For the translator, the huge differences between the structures of differ -
ent languages pose a problem magnified by the constant apparition of new languages: 
the computer languages of each new device, the languages of new urban or cyberurban 
tribes, the languages of fiction, transhuman languages used to communicate with other 
species, or those designed for the communication between machines of different “spe -
cies.” Moreover, these languages are growing at a rate much faster than the rate at which 
old languages become extinct.
Antoni Muntadas deals with this issue in his work On Translation: The Internet 
Project ,11 which forms part of the On Translation series that began in 1994. This project, 
which was a coproduction with äda ’web, Documenta X, and the Goethe Institute, was 
based on a deconstructed “Chinese whispers” game, in which a phrase is transmitted by 
means of a chain of people with the resulting changes in meaning. The phrase 
“Communication systems provide the possibility of developing a better understanding between 
people: but in which language?”  was translated by a chain of translators into 23 different 
languages. The results can be seen in the form of a metaphor in the image of a descend -
ing spiral in which the original phrase slides into the abyss. This process not only 
involved the translation of human languages (English, German, Russian, Korean, 
Swahili, Japanese, or Spanish); the work carried out by the translators was also affected 
by the technological transcodification implied by the differences between them: differ -
ent operating systems, character mapping, keyboards, and so on. Nevertheless, in the 
end we can see that parallel to this loss of meaning there is a replacement of meaning 
carried out by each reader/translator. The linear original meaning is converted into a 
rhizomatic, fertile, unpredictable resignification.
Web 2.0 presents itself to us both as a medium and a system, as a paradigm of coexist -
ence and social contract. Each network requires its communication protocol. All socie -
ties need their constitution. Doesn’t society in the Internet age deserve an editable 
protocol, agreed upon in real time? This seems to have been the question posed by a 
group of Spanish artists that created the Wiki Constitution ,12 which transformed the 
Spanish Constitution into a wiki, a webpage that could be edited by anyone from their 
browser, turning the clauses and articles of the 1978 Constitution on their head. During 
the time in which the project was working (the wiki has since been disabled), you could 
430
G. ROMANOaccess the index, choose the article that you wished to modify, and edit or change what -
ever you liked. Each article also had a discussion page to encourage debate.
We could question ourselves and analyze the reasons why the Wiki Constitution 
project was terminated. While this format has been a tool that generated deferents, 
which has generated important—to this day indispensable—sources of agreed informa -
tion, such as that offered by Wikipedia, we should remember that it has also produced 
fierce virtual battles such as the one centered on the George W . Bush entry during the 
invasion of Iraq, which led to the open access to its editing being closed permanently. 
The Internet is presented to us as a space for free navigation and virtual exchange, but 
it is also a space for dispute, an ephemeral stage for debate, construction, battle, and 
sanction. Whenever these hundreds of virtual battles and attacks take place, from that 
first famous Great Hacker War in 1991 before the World Wide Web existed which was 
fought with weapons already obsolete, we can trace the mark of a warlike 
cyberchronicler.
Altering the Flows of Information
We could say that the artist’s role on the Web is transformed from creator to “redirector” 
of information. She will play as a kind of pilot helping the navigator through the net, 
that smooth space, that virtual world made of nothing but information.
On the other hand, the “real” world became a hypercontrolled space, a world where 
there are no uncatalogued or unlabeled areas, with an endless technological reterritori -
alization of the public space. And that implies the beginning of a new hybrid space with 
new cartographers—like Google and the social networks—whose resources come from 
what might be called a “surplus of intimacy,” harnessing people’s need to make the pri -
vate public (e.g., posting their privacy, making it known) and the public private (e.g., 
obtaining private profit delivering public information).
In a hyperlabeled context that we might call cybergeographic, art has an opportunity 
to alter the flows of recirculating information, and to generate new relational architec -
tures; an expanded topology from which to exploit differences and to foster both hori -
zontal and point-to-point exchange and cooperation.
Notes
 1 Sergei Eisenstein, “A Dialectic Approach to Film Form,” Film Form  (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949), 
50. “Montage is not an idea composed of successive shots stuck together but an idea that DERIVES from 
the collision between two shots that are independent of one another  . . . As in Japanese hieroglyphics in 
which two independent ideographic characters (‘shots’) are juxtaposed and explode into a concept.”
 2 Ibid., 45. “Thus: the projection of the dialectical system of objects into the brain—into abstract creation, 
into thought—produces dialectical modes of thought—dialectical materialism—PHILOSOPHY. 
Similarity: the projection of the same system of objects—in concrete creation—in form—produces ART. 
The basis of the philosophy is the dynamic conception of objects: being as a constant evolution from the 
interaction between two contradictory opposites.”
 3 Multi-Cultural Recycler , Amy Alexander, 1996, http://recycler.plagiarist.org/ (accessed August 18, 2014).
 4 youTAG , Lucas Bambozzi, 2009, http://www.youtag.org/ (accessed August 18, 2014).
 5 My Boyfriend Came Back From the War Remix , Vadim Epstein, 1998, http://myboyfriendcamebackfromth.
ewar.ru/warwara/ (accessed August 18, 2014).
 6 Synthetic Performances , Eva and Franco Mattes, 2007, http://0100101110101101.org/synthetic-perfor -
mances/ (accessed August 18, 2014).
431
OF RE/APPROPRIATIONS 7 Reamweaver , Amy Alexander, The Yes Men, and Steev Hise, 2001, http://netescopio.meiac.es/en/obra.
php?id=141 (accessed August 18, 2014).
 8 Amazon Noir , Ubermorgen, Paolo Cirio and Alessandro Ludovico, 2006, http://www.amazon-noir.com 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
 9 I Wanted to See All of the News From Today , Martin John Callanan, 2007, http://allnews.greyisgood.eu/ 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
10 My_Contacts , Thomson & Craighead, 2008, http://www.thomson-craighead.net/my_contacts/ (accessed 
August 18, 2014).
11 On Translation: The Internet Project , Antoni Muntadas, 1997, http://www.adaweb.com/influx/muntadas/ 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
12 Wiki Constitution , Taller d’Intangibles (Jaume Ferrer and David Gómez, 2004), formerly at: http://www.
enlloc.org/constitucion/descongelat/sobre.htm (accessed August 18, 2014).
Bibliography
Barthes, Roland. S/Z. New York: Hill and Wang, 1975.
Baudrillard, Jean. The Transparency of Evil: Essays on Extreme Phenomena . Translated by James Benedict. 
New York: Verso, 2009.
Burroughs, William. The Soft Machine . Boston, MA: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1992.
Cage, John. Silence: Lectures and Writings by John Cage . Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 
1973.
Calvino, Italo. “Cibernética y fantasmas.” Punto y aparte . Barcelona: Bruguera, 1983.
——. El castillo de los destinos cruzados . Madrid: Siruela, 1999.
Cortázar, Julio. La vuelta al día en ochenta mundos . México: Siglo XXI, 1968.
Debord, Guy. La sociedad del espectáculo y otros textos situacionistas . Madrid: Ediciones de la Flor, 1974.
Deleuze, Gilles y Guattari, Félix. Mille Plateaux . Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1980.
Eisenstein, Sergei. “A Dialectic Approach to Film Form,” Film Form . New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949.
Nelson, Theodor Holm. Literary Machines . Sausalito, CA: Mindful Press, 1993.
Paz, Octavio. La apariencia desnuda, la obra de Marcel Duchamp . México: Nueva Era, 1979.
Queneau, Raymond. Cent mille milliards de poèmes . Paris: Gallimard, 1961.
32
AESTHETICS OF REMIX
Networked Interactive Objects  
and Interface Design
Jonah Brucker-Cohen
The construction and design of a successful interactive object and interface requires the 
seamless integration of several different physical and experiential factors. In particular, 
the aesthetics of interaction, such as the location, physical proximity, connected data 
streams, and mindset of the user all contribute to the overall quality of their experience. 
In interactive media design, there is great attention and detail towards emphasizing the 
surrounding elements and contexts of the interaction. A remix occurs in digital media 
when the physicality of the real world is coupled with the intangible nature of online or 
digital worlds. When a physical input or output is connected to these virtual systems, a 
clear connection is made between a user and the controls in which they are engaged at 
the interface level. A seemingly obvious example of this relationship in real life is the 
way in which our typical interactions with computers is limited due to the tools we are 
given to interact with them, such as the mouse and keyboard. In Affective Computing , 
Picard writes about the advantage of being “not yet flesh and bone,” that computers 
“perceive their world through cameras, microphones, keyboards, mice, and other sen -
sors. These are their eyes, ears, hands, and skin  . . . However, machines need not be 
limited to human-like sensors.”1 She goes on to say that the computer itself has the 
ability to augment its sensory attention beyond what humans can perceive so much that 
eventually the computer could surpass our sensory abilities and “might recognize emo -
tions and other states that humans would not ordinarily recognize.”2 This form of sen -
sory recognition outside of the interface paradigm relates back to the concept of an 
aesthetically determined interaction with computers and other electronic devices. 
Interaction is based on the collective input of elements such as the psychological state 
of the user, the location of the interaction, the interface developed for interaction, or 
the surrounding factors of the environment where the interaction takes place, such as 
through a touch screen on a mobile device or another form of tactile physical 
interface.
In order to interact with traditional computers such as laptops or desktops and other 
forms of technology, such as mobile and handheld devices, we have to be in a certain 
433
AESTHETICS OF REMIXmindset. This includes being focused, determined, attentive, and dedicated to the work 
or game displayed on the screen.3 This mindset quickly dissipates the minute we leave 
the screen, stand up to walk around, and observe the world around us. Innately, we stop 
thinking about what it means for our bodies to be traveling through a space, and our 
biological ability to disseminate information takes over from our concentrated efforts to 
understand specificity. When we move through the world we forget about what our bod -
ies are doing and instead concentrate on the environment. Whether navigating a street 
corner to avoid charging automobiles or moving around an office cubicle, the mind plots 
the route and the body follows. Despite the seamless adaptability we engender, this close 
relationship between physical and personal space immediately disappears when physical 
handicaps are introduced. Whether it is something as minor as a headache or as chronic 
as blindness, biological obstacles make us notice our physical presence when navigating 
the world. Physical disabilities suddenly become disruptions in this natural relationship 
between our surroundings and our bodies.4
By integrating these forms of disruptions into technological objects or interfaces, the 
digital object suddenly becomes more human and transforms into something to which 
we can directly relate. On the most surface level, when a computer or application sud -
denly crashes mid-use, the nature of our interaction with the device changes dramati -
cally. On one hand we are upset about losing our work, but on the other we recognize 
that machines, like us, carry frailties and can almost never reach the form of perfection 
that they are advertised to maintain. Interactive projects that integrate sensors such as 
sonar, video, or light detection have the ability to impart human-like characteristics 
because they are built to react to sudden movements or change their state based on 
touch inputs through haptic feedback.
I combined (remixed) physical clumsiness with virtual interfaces and networked 
devices in a project called LiveWindow .5 LiveWindow  was a browser window controlled 
by inputs from a physical space such as light, physical movement, vibration, and sound. 
This project answered the question of why computer software and hardware could not 
exhibit physical characteristics and other real-world aesthetics such as time-based dete -
rioration and context sensitivity. LiveWindow  allowed anyone to open a browser window 
on the Web and see a virtual representation of a particular physical space. The computer 
hosting the window collected physical (instead of virtual) “hits” as people were encour -
aged to bump into the computer or hit it with their hand to advance the hit counter. In 
its initial installation, the project was connected to a geophone sensor that detected 
vibration and relayed input to a microcontroller connected to the computer. This pro -
ject allowed for a physical interaction to change and influence a virtual networked 
entity that could then be relayed over the Internet. This is similar to the way that auto -
mated burglar alarm systems function, or more recently a plethora of connected devices 
that maintain their own online presence.
One such project was the TweetingSeat  by Chris McNicholl. It sent photos of its users 
from two camera vantage points via T witter whenever someone sat on a custom-built 
park bench. McNicholl explained that the TweetingSeat  was:
created to explore the environments in which it is placed and the people whom 
it encounters. The aim of TweetingSeat  is for people and communities to form 
their own relationship with the object through the way in which they choose 
to use it.6
Figure 32.1   LiveWindow , Jonah Brucker-Cohen, 2001. LiveWindow  is a browser 
controlled by inputs from a physical space such as light, physical movement, 
vibration, and sound (courtesy Jonah Brucker-Cohen)
Figure 32.2   TweetingSeat , Chris McNicholl, 2012. TweetingSeat is a custom-built park 
bench that sends photos of its users from two camera vantage points via 
T witter (courtesy Chris McNicholl)
435
AESTHETICS OF REMIXThis form of connected object gains aesthetic sensibilities from its original incarna -
tion, but the added connectivity and immediacy in its design allows for a closer relation -
ship with users than a typical bench would exhibit. This is because the TweetingSeat  
imparts a social layer that allowed participants to engage with the object outside of the 
immediate time frame of their engagement with the bench itself. Through the advent 
of digital media and connectivity, there is an increased ability to add these levels of 
interaction and engagement to once closed systems such as park benches, thus increas -
ing their aesthetic value and opening their use to a wider audience than those within 
the bench’s local vicinity.
Enabling these experiences from a Do-It-Yourself (DIY) or Make:7 perspective, the 
utilization of low-cost electronic hardware and microcontroller boards such as the 
Arduino8 gives designers the ability to easily engage with a computer or network by 
building an endless array of custom interfaces for interaction. By using low-cost or hob -
byist electronics, it is now possible to redesign common objects with integrated elec -
tronic layers for our existing frameworks of operation and use. Describing the aesthetics 
of use as a metaphor for contextual relationships, Theodor W . Adorno stated that “the 
context in which culture is produced determines its meaning and ideological effect.”9 
Although Adorno wrote of the difference between the cultural influences surrounding 
the creation of pop and classical music, this relationship could be construed to fit any 
form of creative product. Since pop music is usually mass produced and highly standard -
ized it might therefore be considered substandard to classical music. Today, this might 
engender a similar case for the separation of digital art as a less valid form of art from 
traditional genres such as painting and drawing. This distinction also distinguishes how 
the context of use, creation, and exhibition of an object changes people’s perception of 
not only the object itself, but also the aesthetic and cultural specifications it provokes. 
Thus the aesthetic value of an object relies on both its context of use and its ability to 
draw attention to itself as something worth using in the first place.
Of particular interest to the realm of aesthetics and computer-based interventions is 
the coupling—the mashup—of humans and machines and the melding of our habits and 
instincts into machine code, interactive interventions, or the choices made in the indus -
trial design of an object. In several of my projects related to network decay and interac -
tion, I demonstrate how the future of technological interaction may rely on the moment 
where our navigation of machines becomes as innate as that of our bodies through the 
world. With added dysfunction, technology may have the potential to become more like 
us—thus creating a rift in the idea that humans and machines are unique entities that 
can never be equated.
A project of mine that explored the idea of creating aesthetic shifts in how software 
is designed and implemented was BumpList,  a community email list project commis -
sioned by the Whitney Museum of Art for their “Artport” website.10 The project was 
created to reevaluate the structure and culture of email lists and the activities of their 
participants. The main difference between BumpList  and traditional email lists was that 
BumpList  intentionally limited subscribers, prevented user access to message archives, 
and publicly presented user activity on the list. By altering the framework of the email 
list, we explored how these modifications and aesthetic changes to an email list could 
augment and affect accepted forms of online social discourse. The project also exposed 
the inherent power structures prevalent in online mailing list systems imposed by their 
structural design and implementation. The main constraint used with BumpList  was that 
when a new person subscribed, the first person to subscribe was “bumped,” or 
436
J. BRUCKER-COHENunsubscribed from the list. As part of the process, participants’ behaviors were tracked, 
collated, and examined over three phases of constraints. The results showed how public 
statistics that were displayed on the project website such as a Hall of Fame for Most 
Subscriptions, Most Bumps, Most Messages Sent, Most Time Spent on the List, and so 
on, provided a measure of determination for the participants and how the selective 
presentation of these statistics influenced their behavior. This approach to changing 
rule-sets for a mailing list offered methods for building upon and enhancing accepted 
forms of online discussion lists and changing the aesthetic nature of our interaction with 
the social media software of lists. These changes could affect future communication 
methods.
Before initiating the project, we found that one element that stood out in mailing list 
rules and conventions was that the act of being a member and subscribing to an email 
list was the least active aspect for a user. In response to this, BumpList  was created to 
Figure 32.3   BumpList , Jonah Brucker-Cohen and Mike Bennett, 2003. BumpList is a 
mailing list created to investigate the need to belong to a community 
(courtesy Jonah Brucker-Cohen)
437
AESTHETICS OF REMIXinvestigate the need to belong to a community. The aim was to emphasize the “belong -
ing” relationship and to establish if this would have an effect on the behavior of the 
participants subscribed to the list. In effect, this change provoked the aesthetic nature 
of the experience of being on the list because it foregrounded the challenge to stay sub -
scribed, rather than what a typical passive email list exhibits as a background trait. The 
list structure was inherently human-like, akin to the game of “musical chairs” which, 
while music is played, provokes participants to constantly move around a set number of 
seats and when the music stops, they must occupy one of the seats or they are bumped 
from the game and one chair is removed.11 The action of “bumping” in this game and in 
BumpList , in addition to the act of rejoining the activity or in BumpList ’s case, resub -
scribing to the list, was enough impetus for the participants to stay engaged and remain 
loyal to the list. Over the course of its existence from May 2003 to February 2005, 
BumpList  accrued 26,084 total subscriptions, 26,080 bumps, and 24,933 resubscriptions. 
The number of total subscriptions and resubscriptions did not equal the number of 
bumps because many people either resubscribed to the list or never resubscribed after 
their first bump. Users of BumpList  ranged from highly motivated and determined to 
passive and unresponsive. To an unexpected degree, some of the most determined mem -
bers managed to stay on the list, get to know each other, and participate in the discus -
sions. For example, some of the most dedicated users sent more than 1,000 emails to the 
list, accrued more than 30 days total time on the list, and resubscribed more than 1,000 
times. More passive members often signed up out of interest, and after getting bumped, 
never resubscribed. Between these two extremes were a few people who continually 
subscribed and never posted or who posted and subscribed infrequently. At the height 
of the list’s busiest time there appeared to be 15–20 users fighting for the six spots on the 
list. The male/female ratio was about 60 percent male, 40 percent female with age groups 
from 19 to 40 years. A dramatic result of this remix of rules that BumpList  exhibited was 
that in addition to large subscription totals, BumpList  subscribers also produced more 
than 16,000 email messages in four months. The amount of email traffic in relation to 
subscriptions changed over the phases of the list and seemed to fluctuate according to 
the amount of media exposure and the release of a “posting hall of fame” that was placed 
on the main BumpList  website in order to present live data to users about how their 
persistence in subscribing and reliance on the list had measured against other subscrib -
ers. As the time between bump rates approached mere minutes due to a constant influx 
of users fighting for six spots on the list, users had less time in which to respond to mes -
sages. This may have caused them to send more messages in shorter periods of time. 
Similarly, when certain subscribers began competing for top posting records, they tended 
to post more. A subset of user responses included participants’ feelings of rejection after 
being bumped to optimism after resubscribing. Other survey responses indicated feelings 
of accomplishment from inclusion in the statistics to surprise after being bumped quickly 
after signup. The range of responses to getting bumped varied. In the early phases, since 
user activity was limited, subscribers’ responses ranged from surprise to curiosity after 
being bumped. As the list gained more publicity, and more members joined, the feeling 
of being bumped sometimes turned into frustration and surprise at the rapid number of 
bumps over short periods. One user, who stayed on the list more than 14 days with 916 
bumps described his first feeling of being bumped: “I felt challenged and determined to 
return.” Another BumpList  subscriber succinctly described her feeling as “transient frus -
tration.” Some of the respondents felt that because they had to actively stay subscribed 
to the list, their attachment grew stronger. “With so much on the Internet that can be 
438
J. BRUCKER-COHENconsumed without too much effort, the perceived value is much higher with something 
that takes some work,”12 explained one member, who had 722 posts, and 1,034 sub -
scribes. A number of members also gained a sense of accomplishment from being 
included in the hall of fame during the last two phases. One subscriber who resubscribed 
146 times, declared his inclusion in the hall of fame as “triumphant.” Certain others felt 
that the hall of fame kept them interested in the list and their subsequent activity while 
subscribed. A dedicated subscriber stated, “The stats give a sense of accomplishment/ 
competition for me. I don’t know that I would have been so active on the list if there 
were no stats available.” Over time, milestones of subscription and posting activity 
emerged, causing certain core members to acknowledge each other based on rank. For 
example, one member sent a message to the list that referred to the number of posts 
tallied from a fellow BumpList  subscriber.
On August 20th, 2003, around 10:13 PM CDT, she was the first person to reach 
the 1000 post mark. Look at the time she was on the list, versus the number of 
posts. Kinda brings a tear to your eye.13
This idea of making the behaviors associated with using software and hardware more 
human-like was inspired by the Turing test that aimed to equate machines with harbor -
ing human thought.14 Although the justification as to whether this is beneficial or det -
rimental has yet to be determined, the chance and opportunity for increased and more 
developed forms of interaction with computers has the potential to change our lives for 
the better. For instance, we are context-sensitive creatures. We are aware of our sur -
roundings and change moods, intentions, appearance, and both mental and physical 
states depending on our location. Our “sensors” are biometric, have narrow bandwidth, 
and never crash, unless we inhibit them. Technology that typically contains no elec -
tronic sensors on it reacts to its context, except when it overheats; contains built-in 
geographical mapping capabilities to know its location; or is disconnected from power 
and network connectivity. One possible control mechanism we could impart to change 
this paradigm is for us to design technology that could relinquish its control over us and 
in effect “stoop” to our level by becoming more human.
The question remains as to whether computers and their inherent design and func -
tionality control us, or do we control them? When someone clicks a link on the Web, 
they have to wait for the resulting page to download. At this moment they are “power -
less” as the machine and speed of their network connection controls the situation. Why 
does the network ignore the human’s angst of waiting and how can this control be taken 
back? If technology was more like us, the burdens it might have would be in response to 
its physical, not virtual, environments.15 This human-centric approach to interface and 
interaction design is an area that often becomes apparent when we are using the Internet 
as stated above. Beginning from the first networked transmission across the Atlantic, 
the phenomena of fixed-wire infrastructure networks dates back to the invention of the 
telegraph as an early form of communication. As Neil Postman explained, the telegraph 
was instrumental in separating information from physical locations and political 
functions.
The telegraph removed space as an inevitable constraint on the movement of 
information, and, for the first time transportation and communication were 
disengaged from each other. In the United States, the telegraph erased state 
439
AESTHETICS OF REMIXlines, collapsed regions, and, by wrapping the continent in an information grid, 
created the possibility of a unified nation-state. But more than this, telegraphy 
created the idea of context-free information, that is, the idea that the value of 
information need not be tied to any function it might serve in social and politi -
cal decision-making and action. The telegraph made information into a com -
modity, a “thing” that could be bought and sold irrespective of its uses or 
meaning.16
This shift from location-based information to decentralized systems is one of the reasons 
why the Internet is so successful as a communication and commerce medium. Despite 
the seemingly utopian vision of instantaneous communication transmission across bor -
ders, accessing the Internet still remains a challenge in some countries. In particular, in 
developing countries that have less communication infrastructure in place, the chance 
of connecting to the global Internet is minimal if existent at all. Even in industrialized 
countries, getting “connected” at home and in private establishments often comes with 
a price tag. Usually, the more one pays for their Internet connection, the faster that 
connection tends to be. Crank the Web was a project I developed in response to this 
Figure 32.4   Crank the Web , Jonah Brucker-Cohen, 2001. Users manually download Web 
content by turning a crank handle (courtesy Jonah Brucker-Cohen)
440
J. BRUCKER-COHENmonetary challenge, as well as the aesthetic and often seamless experience of downloading.  
The project utilized a mechanical hand crank that was connected to an Internet-
connected PC via a serial port. Users typed a URL into a browser on the PC (the same 
way they would with any computer), and pressed the return key. This opened a blank 
browser window. The user then turned the crank handle to manually download the 
website. This process added human movement to the act of retrieving information from 
the Internet. Although it did not act as a tangible form of navigation from site to site, 
it did add a physicality and manual action to the process of downloading information on 
the Web—which is uncommon in today’s high-tech world. The idea behind Crank the 
Web was to combine (to mash) ancient forms of automation with contemporary digital 
telecommunications technology. The crank, a technology that dates more than 1,000 
years ago, is a familiar manual process.
The project adopts the belief that it is ultimately up to individuals to use the crank to 
physically obtain their bandwidth, thus resulting in an Internet connection speed based 
on personal strength, rather than personal wealth. The project examined how trans -
forming technological processes from intangible to tangible forms could result in a form 
of democratization where the technology itself becomes both attainable and understand -
able. The crank also added a sense of motion and transfer to the common process of 
clicking a link on the Internet. Chun describes the media space as a traversal across vast 
distances through “teleportation” rather than the “backwards” and “forwards” metaphors 
that most traditional interfaces (such as Web browsers) often adhere to when navigating 
these information spaces:
Even new media reduced to its interface, as navigable space, rewrites the rela -
tion between space and tours. Consider, for instance, the experience of “surfing” 
or “browsing” the Web in 2005. Both Netscape Navigator and Microsoft’s 
Internet Explorer rely on navigational icons  . . . In either case, by typing in an 
address, or by clicking from location to location, you teleport rather than travel 
from one virtual location to another, and the backward and forward icons do 
not move backwards and forwards between contiguous locations.17
This separation of place with the action of getting there is evident in many Internet-
related applications as Chun describes and is a key element of Crank the Web . The 
project added the act of reaching a location into the experience of surfing the Web since 
a user has to physically exert him or herself to accomplish the final goal of downloading 
a website. This experience is the opposite of a typical interaction with the Web, some -
thing that is instantaneous and requires no effort (besides a click) on the part of the user.
When you wait for a computer to deliver information over the network, you become 
immediately dependent on the machine, the infrastructure it is connected to and 
become powerless beyond this connection point. The project circumvented this rela -
tionship and literally put the power back into the person’s hand that was interacting 
with the system in question. My intent was to also add the aesthetic element of humor 
and introspection to the act of visiting a website and downloading content from the 
Internet. The crank in turn, adds an element of inconvenience to this seemingly auto -
mated system and offers a novel perspective on the action and activity of downloading 
a website. Ideally through using the project, users would be able to understand how 
physical activities are closely related to the virtual and machine-led processes of down -
loading and accessing information on the Internet.
441
AESTHETICS OF REMIXSimilarly situated in the world of physical motion and manipulation, it should be 
possible that when someone stands on top of a computer it could be made to notice this 
interaction and react accordingly. Likewise, when someone tips a monitor onto its side, 
the windows on the screen would also tip over to acknowledge the change, similar to 
the way an Apple iPhone screen changes from landscape to portrait mode. When some -
one pounds hard on the keyboard, the font size, for instance, should increase in response. 
These types of subtle cues are innate to us as they aid us in manipulating the analog 
world. They make us human while at the same time distinguish us from other objects. 
In the design of computer interfaces, it is not enough to simply inject “desktop” meta -
phors and skeuomorph real-world characteristics into the design of computers and their 
software. Instead, there has to be a breaking point where the interface between the 
physical and virtual begins to exhibit and engender similar traits, including those of 
decomposition, decay, and dysfunction. For instance when billions of people click on 
the Google search button it should show an element of decay, as a door handle used by 
thousands of people at a sports arena would fall off or break.
In order for computers and software to change, the stigma of interface as having purely 
digital characteristics must ideally be separated from technology. Designers should be 
questioning the very nature of digital systems, metaphors for interaction, and methods 
of thinking and using computers. Interface should literally mean “in your face,” as the 
interface of our bodies typically overpowers the standard computer interface as we know 
it. Everywhere we inhabit, physical objects infiltrate our homes, offices, towns, cities, 
and personal lives. The more we accumulate, the more we forget about the last thing we 
accumulated. We may have even moved beyond the “Information Age” where, as 
Castells explains, information and its manipulation become more important than the 
medium in which it is delivered.18 Ultimately, the methods we use to gain connectivity 
to the Internet and its vast wealth of information are becoming standardized to the point 
where the Internet is transforming into another form of public utility. The network the 
Internet inhabits has become as vital as the electric grid, phone lines, water, and gas 
mains. Without it we would be both lost and liberated. Orlik explains that the idea of 
“technological escapism” includes treating the Internet as something that would ulti -
mately cut people off from society and maybe even reality.19 For those people who use it 
every day, most cannot even remember a time when it did not exist. How did we buy 
airplane tickets? Find out about movie show times? Many people never even participated 
in auctions until eBay came along. Things that come to us via computer are not only for 
us but are part of a shared community. How many times have two different people who 
have never met emailed you the same link? These types of occurrences are now com -
monplace online, especially within online communities, where information exchanges 
are as contagious and viral as the common cold. In effect, the shrinking of our world 
through advances in communications technologies such as the Internet has led to a 
changing aesthetic and more worthwhile experience for us as users, consumers, and 
producers of technology and technological artifacts. Whether this is beneficial to us is 
still under great scrutiny, but the challenge remains as to whether our experience with 
technology will ever gain the seamless interaction and complacency that we exhibit 
when we interact with each other and the physical world. This point extrapolates on 
the concept of remix in machine topologies because of our current and future reliance 
on all things digital and how the bits of information we manipulate daily must align 
themselves with our physical selves and the objects and space that we inhabit. Thus our 
bodies and actions are constantly in a state of remix with intangible data and online 
442
J. BRUCKER-COHENculture where we must redefine our lives in response to how well we integrate with the 
data sphere on a daily basis. Our lives have become a constant state of remix and redis -
covery with everything that we do within an increasingly technological landscape.
Notes
 1 Rosalind Picard, Affective Computing  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000) 52–53.
 2 Ibid., 53.
 3 Sonia Aujer and Anke Richter. “The User Intention Oriented Approach to User Interface Patterns,” 
Proceedings of Workshop on HCI Patterns, INTERACT 2005 Rome, Italy, 31.
 4 George Taleporos and Marita P . McCabe, “Body Image and Physical Disability—Personal Perspectives,” 
Social Science & Medicine  54, no. 6 (2002): 971–980.
 5 LiveWindow , available at: http://www.coin-operated.com/coinop29/2010/05/02/live-window-2001/.
 6 TweetingSeat , available at: http://www.chrismcnicholl.com/projects/tweetingseat.
 7 Make:, www.makezine.com.
 8 Arduino Controller, www.arduino.cc.
 9 Theodor W . Adorno, Aesthetic Theory  (London: Athlone Press, 1997), 67.
10 Jonah Brucker-Cohen and Michael Bennett, BumpList , 2003, available at: http://www.bumplist.net.
11 Holly Arrow and Scott Crosson, “Musical Chairs: Membership-Dynamics in Self-Organized Group 
Formation,” Small Group Research  34, no. 5 (2003): 523–556.
12 Email message from user 43212, Bumplist.net, 2004.
13 Email message from user 3212, Bumplist.net, 2003.
14 Stuart M. Shieber, “The Turing Test as Interactive Proof,” Nôus  41, no. 4 (2008): 686–713, http://www.
eecs.harvard.edu/shieber/Biblio/Papers/turing-interactive-proof.pdf.
15 Picard, Affective Computing , 63.
16 Neil Postman, Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology  (New York: Knopf, 1992), 67–68.
17 Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics  (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2005), 47, 52.
18 Manuel Castells, The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003), 140.
19 Peter B. Orlik, Electronic Media Criticism: Applied Perspectives  (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2000), 128.
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor W . Aesthetic Theory . London: Athlone Press, 1997.
Arduino Controller. www.arduino.cc (accessed May 24, 2013).
Arrow, Holly, and Scott Crosson. “Musical Chairs: Membership-Dynamics in Self-Organized Group 
Formation,” Small Group Research  34, no. 5 (2003): 523–556.
Aujer, Sonia, and Anke Richter. “The User Intention Oriented Approach to User Interface Patterns,” 
Proceedings of Workshop on HCI Patterns , INTERACT 2005, Rome, Italy.
Brucker-Cohen, Jonah, and Michael Bennett, BumpList , 2003, available at: http://www.bumplist.net 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
Castells, Manuel. The Internet Galaxy: Reflections on the Internet, Business, and Society . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics . 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2005.
Kurzweil, Ray. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence , New York: 
Penguin (Non-Classics), 2000, 63.
LiveWindow , available at: http://www.coin-operated.com/coinop29/2010/05/02/live-window-2001/ 
(accessed September 2, 2013).
Make:. http://www.makezine.com (accessed May 24, 2013).
Miller, Rose. “Is the Internet the Public Utility of the Future?” Utne Reader , September 8, 2005. http://
www.utnereader.com/community/istheinternetthepublicutilityofthefuture.aspx#axzz3AkS0Hkgc 
(accessed August 18, 2014).
443
AESTHETICS OF REMIXNorretranders, Tor. The User Illusion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size . New York: Penguin, 1999, 
124.
Orlik, Peter B. Electronic Media Criticism: Applied Perspectives . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2000.
Picard, Rosalind. Affective Computing . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Postman, Neil. Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology . New York: Knopf, 1992.
Shieber, Stuart M. “The Turing Test as Interactive Proof.” Nôus  41, no. 4 (2008): 686–713. http://www.
eecs.harvard.edu/shieber/Biblio/Papers/turing-interactive-proof.pdf (accessed September 1, 2013).
Standage, Tom. The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century’s 
On-Line Pioneers . New York: Walker and Co., 1999, 13.
Taleporos, George, and Marita P . McCabe. “Body Image and Physical Disability—Personal 
Perspectives,” Social Science & Medicine  54, no. 6 (2002): 971–980.
TweetingSeat , available at: http://www.chrismcnicholl.com/projects/tweetingseat (accessed September 
3, 2013).
44433
REFLECTIONS ON  
THE AMEN BREAK
A Continued History, an Unsettled 
Ethics
Nate Harrison
It is not uncommon, when engaged in a conversation about copying, appropriation, and 
remixing, that I hear the terms “copyright infringement” and “plagiarism” used inter -
changeably. This happens especially in educational settings, though any context is per -
haps understandable given that, despite artists’ increased awareness of intellectual prop -
erty issues over the last decade, “plagiarism” as an idea still seems hazy—simultaneously 
bygone yet ever-present.1 Its “old school” connotation has somehow been replaced by 
copyright’s digital “tech now.” And although related, copyright infringement and pla -
giarism are significantly different concepts. Simply put, while copyright infringement is 
a legal violation, plagiarism is better understood in terms of ethical misconduct. One 
can plagiarize without necessarily infringing a copyright. For instance, assume a schem -
ing dramatist copies a Shakespeare play, hoping to pass it off as an original work. As all 
of Shakespeare’s plays reside in the public domain, no copyrights will be infringed, yet 
most would regard this appropriation disparagingly as unoriginal and unethical thiev -
ery—the secondary user taking something creative and attempting to take credit for it 
without the due effort or responsibility to its historical significance. Conversely, car -
toonists the Air Pirates were found liable for infringing Disney’s copyrights in 1978, 
though clearly the adult comic books in question parodied rather than plagiarized 
Mickey and Minnie Mouse’s perceived wholesomeness.2
At their most elemental, what both plagiarism and copyright infringement share is 
the common act of copying. Over the next pages, my intention is to identify slippages 
that occur between plagiarism and copyright—between ethical and legal categorization 
in the cultural life of intellectual property. As a case study, I will detail my own experi -
ences with what is popularly known as the Amen Break , a six-second drum beat sample 
lifted from a late 1960s soul recording. Music remix culture today continues to rely 
heavily on copies of the Amen Break , but it is the particular path the sample travels 
within the context of a history project and art work I produced in 2004 that can provide 
further nuance on the sometimes blurry lines that separate copyright infringement and 
445
REFLECTIONS ON THE AMEN BREAKplagiarism. Indeed, as copying, especially using digital tools, has become such a natural -
ized aspect of communication, it is not always apparent when boundaries are probed, let 
alone transgressed. I hope that my story-within-a-story inspires the reader to examine 
his or her own participation in the (re)production of culture through the everyday act 
of copying.
Can I Get An Amen?
In December 2004 I completed a sound art installation entitled Can I Get An Amen?  
The work consists of a 17-minute spoken word recording (I supplied the voiceover) 
cut to an acetate record—in DJ jargon a “dub plate”—which plays on a standard 
Technics SL-1200MK2 turntable ( Figure 33.1 ). The record can be played on a stereo 
pair of loudspeakers or through headphones. In addition to the audio component, the 
installation also includes: a color, life-size photo reproduction of The Winstons’ 1969 
7" single “Color Him Father”; registration documents showing that Richard Spencer, 
front man for The Winstons, holds the copyrights in both “Color Him Father,” and its 
B-side, “Amen, Brother”; and finally, a printout of the contents of stock audio com -
pany Zero G’s Jungle Warfare breakbeat sample collection, which contains several 
Amen Break loops (unlicensed from The Winstons). All of these materials are mounted 
on a wall next to the turntable. Their significance is explained throughout the course 
of my narration in the spoken word recording.3 I have described Can I Get An  
Amen?  as:
Figure 33.1   Can I Get An Amen? Nate Harrison, Sandroni Rey, Los Angeles, 2007 
(courtesy Nate Harrison)
446
N. HARRISONAn audio project that unfolds a critical perspective of perhaps the most 
sampled drum beat in the history of recorded music, the “Amen Break.” It 
begins with ’60s soul band The Winstons and their pop instrumental track 
Amen, Brother, and traces the transformation of the song’s drum solo from 
its original context as part of a B-side vinyl single into its use as a key aural 
ingredient in contemporary, sample and collage-based remix culture. The 
work attempts to bring into scrutiny the techno-utopian notion that “infor -
mation wants to be free”—it questions this freedom’s effectiveness as a 
democratizing agent. This as well as other issues are foregrounded through 
a history of the Amen Break and its peculiar relationship to current copy -
right law.4
My project thus serves as an audio essay that unpacks the history-making journey of one 
particular drum beat recording through the early postmodern formation of both art and 
cultural property law.
I won’t dwell too much on the content of Can I Get An Amen? ; the project is readily 
available online and I encourage the reader to spend time with it there.5 Here I’d like to 
focus on the work’s passage through the cultural landscape—to the ways in which it spread 
and transformed in the ensuing years. After exhibiting the work at CalArts in the spring 
of 2005, I posted a description and documentation of Can I Get An Amen?  on my personal 
website. Like many artists with online portfolios, my intention was to give potential cura -
tors a sense of the conceptual and practical aspects of the project. The project page still 
includes a QuickTime video of the record playing in its entirety, which makes for a pretty 
boring visual experience. However, since the emphasis of the project was its audio com -
ponent, the minimalist video reinforced the importance of the sound. My primary desire 
was to present an audio work within the visual logic of an art exhibition.
I’ve always considered the online version of Can I Get An Amen?  as a poor substitute for 
the analog, gallery specific version. Yet its existence on the Web is precisely what cata -
pulted it from a project I made while pursuing my graduate studies into one of the first 
instances of the “mini documentary” genre now so prevalent on the Internet.6 As a direct 
result of YouTube user mobieus32 “appropriating” the QuickTime file from my site and 
uploading it to the popular social video site, Can I Get An Amen?  amassed more than 
88,000 views within a year.7 A short time later, The Winstons’ publisher, Holly Bee Music, 
Inc., contacted me after viewing the YouTube upload, having had no idea of the cultural 
significance of the Amen  drum loop. I initially feared Holly Bee Music would begin legal 
proceedings against me (for copyright infringement). But the opposite was the case; Holly 
Bee thanked me for bringing Amen  sampling to its attention and wanted to know how 
they might be able to recover potential lost licensing revenues. I replied that I was not a 
lawyer, but that I wished them luck in their pursuits.8 Family relatives of the original band 
members also reached out to me. Over time Can I Get An Amen?  was featured on several 
music, culture, and intellectual property law websites and radio shows, including the BBC’s 
Radio 1, which dedicated an entire program and DJ mix in honor of the Amen Break .9 
Several electronic music producers, including Wax Tailor and Skrillex, sampled the pro -
ject for use in their hip hop and dance music remixes.10 As of August 2013, the YouTube 
version of Can I Get An Amen? had amassed over 4.3 million views; this in addition to the 
many occasions the “original” work has been exhibited in gallery and museum settings 
(i.e., within the institution of Art). One of the aspects of the project that continues to 
interest me is its travel from “high” to “low” culture and back again.
447
REFLECTIONS ON THE AMEN BREAKIt is important to note that mobieus32 never asked for my permission to post  Can I 
Get An Amen?  to YouTube, nor did I ever grant it. I learned of its existence only after a 
friend told me he had seen the work there. I was surprised by the upload, but excited to 
see it being shared. I also realized there wasn’t much I could do to stop its circulation, 
short of sending a takedown message to YouTube and removing the QuickTime version 
from my own website. And I didn’t want that; it was important to me that my project, 
an analysis of the Amen Break , traverse the same cultural path that the original sample 
had: one that required unregulated copying and distribution. “Information wants to be 
free,” as the cliché goes. The online existence of Can I Get An Amen? —its form—
matched its content.
Amen and Seven Seconds of Fire
While perusing the user comments on the YouTube page in late December 2011, I 
noticed several viewers were referred to the project through an article published by The 
Economist  (Figure 33.2 ). Intrigued by what a reputable, highbrow, politics and econom -
ics journal might have to say about contemporary music sampling, I discovered that it 
published a story, both in print and online, about the history of the Amen Break . The 
story was remarkably similar to my own—too similar, in my opinion.11 For the first time 
since conceiving Can I Get An Amen? , it seemed I had been copied inappropriately . But 
I didn’t feel as though I had been infringed as much as plagiarized. Compelled to write 
The Economist ’s editors, I reproduce here the letter I sent, which explains my ethical 
dilemma.
Figure 33.2  Can I Get An Amen? YouTube screenshot (courtesy Nate Harrison)
448
N. HARRISONDecember 26, 2011
Dear Sir or Madame,
This letter is in response to The Economist article “Seven seconds of fire,” dated 
December 17th, as well as its corresponding Prospero blog entry, “Just a sample” 
(http://www.economist.com/node/21540676) from December 15th. I would first like 
to commend the editors at The Economist for putting into print such an important 
topic. The history of the “Amen break” is recounted in a lively and elaborate tone 
evoking the excitement all those drum loop permutations have delivered to our ears 
over the years. More significantly, a whole new group of people (i.e., subscribers) 
who might not have otherwise known are now aware of an important subculture 
and its development. Yet the story wasn’t entirely new to me; you see, I authored a 
project, Can I Get An Amen?  (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5SaFTm2bcac) 
that told an almost identical story, also in December of 2004.
Now, my project and The Economist articles do share some differences. “Seven 
seconds of fire” contains more specifics (e.g., technical details, quotations) than Can 
I Get An Amen?  Likewise, my essay ultimately seeks to raise important copyright 
issues surrounding not only the Amen break but also cultural production in general, 
while The Economist text just briefly mentions the ownership aspects of the now 
infamous drum solo. And The Economist names G. C. Coleman as the original 
drummer, while I did not (regrettably, researching in 2003 I was not able to confirm 
with absolute certainty that Coleman played the drums for The Winstons).
With all this said, however, there are simply too many similarities between the 
works leading me to conclude that it is practically impossible the editors at The 
Economist—and indeed, their anonymity only adds another layer of complexity—
could not have heard Can I Get An Amen?  I am certain they used it, without citation, 
as a primary source.12 Not only is the narrative arc of their story largely the same 
as my own, they also mirror certain structural elements. For example, the editors 
write of the nostalgia for the Amen break, as I did. They also ask the question “Why 
was the Amen so popular?” and offered an analysis based on its formal qualities, as 
I did. Four of the illustrating songs they posted to the Prospero blog for readers to 
hear are examples I also used (when there are literally thousands of Amen tracks 
from which the editors could have chosen to showcase). Finally, at the level of 
sentence comparison, in 2004 I wrote “It’s been used so much, I might argue it’s now 
entered into the collective audio unconscious,” while The Economist wrote in 2011 
“Coleman’s seven-second break had entered the collective aural unconscious of a 
generation of young Britons.” I will leave it for readers to decide.
And indeed some of them already have. In the days following the publication of 
“Seven seconds of fire,” these are just some of the reader comments posted on The 
Economist website:
“The excellent story caused me to further research the Amen Break. I was 
amazed to find immediately a twenty-minute very informative lecture on YouTube 
from 2004 about the subject that nearly follows point by point the author’s article. It 
appears the author may have borrowed—or ‘sampled’—quite a bit from the video.”
And:
449
REFLECTIONS ON THE AMEN BREAK“I liked this article so I wanted to learn more about the ‘Amen Break’ and 
I came across the twenty min [sic] YouTube video that others mention. 
It appears the author is doing the same thing with the material that s/he 
articulates is happening with this drum riff. Art imitating life? I expect more 
from The Economist.”13
Further, from the comments on the project’s YouTube page:
“If you are here due to The Economist, ask yourself if The Economist author 
basically copied this video for his article  . . . unless it is one and the same 
person  . . . because the content of the article is exactly the same.”
And:
“Brilliant video, and yes, The Economist article is completely biting this.”14
Now, this puts me in a peculiar situation. I want to be clear that this letter 
is not some sort of “cease and desist” threat. Writing such a letter would be 
hypocritical of me, especially given the nature and content of Can I Get An 
Amen?  It would also go against my own strong belief and respect for the copyleft 
movement. Over the last several years, dozens of writers, musicians (including 
some pretty famous DJs), and students have all contacted me, kindly asking 
permission to quote/appropriate/remix my work, and I have always (and will 
always) allowed for it. I am also aware that there are people who will sample 
my work without my knowing, and there is little I can do about that.
But I do want to distinguish legal from ethical issues here, just as there is a 
difference between copyright infringement and plagiarism (although I am less 
interested in whether The Economist is committing either the former or the latter). 
There is a (now doubled) irony involving anonymous writers at The Economist, 
who are telling a tale about the largely forgotten band The Winstons and their 
unrecognized impact on legions of mostly anonymous music producers, by taking 
portions of another writer’s work and not crediting that writer. In other words, 
The Economist is ultimately reproducing the very dynamic it seeks to critically 
illuminate. Is this intentional on the editors’ part? Some sort of postmodernist 
sleight of hand, a cunning wink to their more savvy readers? Or plain sloppy 
journalism? It’s especially strange that the editors would use audio examples culled 
from YouTube videos, which further link to my video, making it easy for curious 
readers to stumble onto my work and consequently exposing the problem I am 
detailing here. Given the stalwart reputation The Economist has maintained for 
so long now, I call upon its editors to do the right thing and give credit where 
credit is due.
Sincerely yours,
Nate Harrison15
450
N. HARRISONWithin a few days, Tom Nuttall, deputy/online Europe editor and author of The 
Economist piece, responded to my letter. While admitting that he had encountered Can 
I Get An Amen?  online before writing his article, he also stated that he had grown up in 
London—ground-zero of the Amen /jungle scene—and was long aware of the break’s 
sampling and significance. Primarily, Mr. Nuttall answered that he and I both had 
touched upon the general narrative of the Amen , as any proper history should have. And 
while my work centered on intellectual property issues, The Economist  piece focused 
around cultural aspects. I’m not sure I agree with Nuttall’s assessment, but, to his credit, 
he updated the piece online to include a reference to my project, writing, “As a general 
principle, I think that it is courteous for writers to acknowledge an outstanding and 
original contribution and so I have linked to it.”16 I was satisfied with this reply.
Amen (So Be It)
My letter to The Economist  should not be interpreted here as an egotistical gesture, as if 
my history of the Amen Break  is the history. It certainly is not. I encourage readers to look 
up Mr. Nuttall’s piece, compare it to my work, and decide for themselves what sorts of 
ethical lines, if any, were crossed. As I wrote above, I not only tolerate but also appreci -
ate the ways in which awareness and use of both the original drum loop as well as my 
meditation on it have circulated. But the interaction with The Economist  did give me 
pause, causing me to reevaluate my attitude towards sampling, appropriation, infringe -
ment and plagiarism. And while I remain a committed “copyleftist,” I also believe that 
along with copying comes a responsibility to source material. Such responsibility goes 
beyond proper citations, or credits in journals; it goes beyond music remix culture in its 
myriad manifestations—across medicine, architecture, even law itself. As the simple act 
of copying increasingly becomes first nature across global demographics, it’s all the more 
crucial that what I have previously called a “semiotic integrity” to source material is 
maintained.17 That is, every act of borrowing should strive, in its new re-presentation, 
to acknowledge in some way the circumstances out of which its source material is taken. 
This could be something as simple as citations in essay writing or as complex as the 
careful manipulation of (and simultaneous reference to) established visual codes in post -
modernist art (as in Sherrie Levine’s early work).18 Context is important. If it ceases to 
matter, then we are left with what Jean Baudrillard and Frederic Jameson referred to, so 
many years ago during the emergence of media appropriation, as simulation and pas -
tiche—conditions that attenuate critical thinking in the service of constructing 
pseudo-history.19
Notes
 1 A recent example of the crossover between rhetorics of copyright infringement and plagiarism involves 
the school essay evaluation service Turnitin (http://www.turnitin.com), which scans student work to 
catch and deter copying. The company hosts an “educational” website (http://www.plagiarism.org) that, 
in this author’s estimation, problematically conflates issues of plagiarism with those surrounding intel -
lectual property. Ironically, a group of students sued Turnitin, claiming copyright infringement due to the 
company’s for-profit use of students’ original work. Turnitin prevailed. See A.V . v. iParadigms, LLC 
(2009), http://www.ca4.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Published/081424.P .pdf.
 2 “Walt Disney Productions v. Air Pirates, 581 F 2nd 751 Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit 1978—Google 
Scholar,” Google, accessed December 4, 2013, http://scholar.google.com.mx/scholar_case?case=1298582
4547460808287&hl=en&as_sdt=2&as_vis=1&oi=scholarr&sa=X&ei=l0MIUsv7I4jZ2A WTn4HwCw
&ved=0CCgQgAMoADAA.
451
REFLECTIONS ON THE AMEN BREAK  See also Bob Levin, The Pirates and the Mouse: Disney’s War Against the Counterculture  (Seattle, WA: 
Fantagraphics Books, 2003).
 3 Can I Get An Amen? can be found on my website. See Nate Harrison, “Nate Harrison,” last modified 
August 15, 2006, http://www.nkhstudio.com/pages/popup_amen.html.
 4 Ibid.
 5 The recording is also available on YouTube. See Landon Proctor, “Video explains the world’s most impor -
tant 6-sec drum loop—YouTube,” YouTube, accessed December 4, 2013, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=5SaFTm2bcac.
 6 By “mini documentary” I am referring to five- to ten-minute, semi-professional video and audio produc -
tions made possible by cheaper and more accessible media technologies. With video capabilities present 
in most phones now, barely a day goes by without a new mini documentary going viral. For an early 
example, see The Story of Stuff , http://www.storyofstuff.org/movies-all/story-of-stuff/.
 7 Mobieus32 was the online alias of Landon Proctor, who has since retired the name. Landon Proctor, 
e-mail message to the author, November 24, 2012.
 8 Johnny Moses of Holly Bee Music, in telephone conversation with the author, August 9, 2007.
 9 “BBC Radio 1—BBC Radio 1’s Stories, The Amen Break,” British Broadcasting Corporation, last modi -
fied May 2, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00rzp6w. I was interviewed for the segment along 
with several other musicians and cultural critics.
10 BOL3KiLOL3K, “Wax Tailor—Once Upon a Past—YouTube,” YouTube, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=BiBxh7Mg3OM; CannibalWhirm, “SKRILLEX—I know who you are,” YouTube, http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=HuwNw_fVFUY&list=FLKNmY2QCp1ucL6TJOzqeaUg&index=19.
11 See “Seven Seconds of Fire,” The Economist , last modified December 17, 2011, http://www.economist.
com/node/21541707.
12 The Economist  maintains a policy of editorial anonymity. See http://www.economist.com/help/about-
us#About_Economistcom.
13 Comments taken from users “Otto von Kronq” and “y7JUMZwGiq,” respectively, who posted responses 
to The Economist article online.
14 Comments taken from users “davidhelvadjian” and “myoest,” respectively, who posted to the YouTube 
page.
15 With the exception of corrected typographical errors, my letter is unchanged from the version sent to The 
Economist .
16 Tom Nuttall, e-mail message to the author, January 3, 2012.
17 Nate Harrison, “In Fair Use, Freedom Does Not Equal Progress,” Antenna  (blog), June 14, 2013, http://
blog.commarts.wisc.edu/2013/06/14/in-fair-use-freedom-does-not-equal-progress/.
18 On Sherrie Levine’s early appropriation work, see Howard Singerman and Sherrie Levine, Art History, 
After Sherrie Levine  (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2012).
19 On simulation see Jean Baudrillard, Simulations (New York, NY: Semiotext(e), Inc., 1983). On pastiche 
see Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, Or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism  (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1991).
Bibliography
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulations . New York: Semiotext(e), Inc., 1983.
“BBC Radio 1—BBC Radio 1’s Stories, The Amen Break.” British Broadcasting Corporation . last 
modified May 2, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00rzp6w (accessed August 18, 2014).
BOL3KiLOL3K. “Wax Tailor—Once Upon a Past—YouTube.” YouTube video. http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=BiBxh7Mg3OM (accessed August 18, 2014).
CannibalWhirm. “SKRILLEX—I know who you are.” YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=HuwNw_fVFUY&list=FLKNmY2QCp1ucL6TJOzqeaUg&index=19 (accessed December 
4, 2013).
Harrison, Nate. “Nate Harrison.” Last modified August 15, 2006. http://www.nkhstudio.com/pages/
popup_amen.html (accessed August 18, 2014).
——. “In Fair Use, Freedom Does Not Equal Progress,” Antenna (blog), June 14, 2013, http://blog.
commarts.wisc.edu/2013/06/14/in-fair-use-freedom-does-not-equal-progress/ (accessed August 18, 
2014).
452
N. HARRISONJameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, Or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1991.
Levin, Bob. The Pirates and the Mouse: Disney’s War Against the Counterculture . Seattle, WA: 
Fantagraphics Books, 2003.
Proctor, Landon. “Video Explains the World’s Most Important 6-sec Drum Loop—YouTube.” YouTube 
video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5SaFTm2bcac (accessed December 4, 2013).
“Seven Seconds of Fire.” The Economist . Last modified December 17, 2011. http://www.economist.com/
node/21541707(accessed August 18, 2014).
Singerman, Howard and Sherrie Levine. Art History, After Sherrie Levine . Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2012.
“Walt Disney Productions v. Air Pirates, 581 F 2nd 751 Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit 1978—
Google Scholar.” Google.com. http://scholar.google.com.mx/scholar_case?case=129858245474608
08287&hl=en&as_sdt=2&as_vis=1&oi=scholarr&sa=X&ei=l0MIUsv7I4jZ2A WTn4HwCw&ved
=0CCgQgAMoADAA (accessed December 4, 2013).
45334
GOING CRAZY WITH 
REMIX
A Classroom Study by Practice  
via Lenz v. Universal
xtine burrough and Emily Erickson
Figure 34.1   Dancing babies: (left) Michael Girard’s 3D dancing baby and (right) Holden 
Lenz dances on YouTube
In the mid-1990s, Michael Girard’s 3D dancing baby graphic1 became an early example 
of an Internet meme.2 From email inboxes to the television program Ally McBeal , where 
the clip was inserted during the protagonist’s hallucinations. The dancing baby exempli -
fies Douglas Rushkoff’s notion of a “living organism” that travels Richard Dawkins’s 
etymological parallel between genes and memes: “the circulatory system for today’s 
information, ideas, and images.”3 This case study includes yet another baby dancing 
online, though the author’s intent was anything but viral media. In 2007, Stephanie 
Lenz posted a 29-second video of her toddler dancing to Prince’s 1980s hit Let’s Go 
Crazy  on YouTube ( Figure 34.1 ).4 The song, playing in a room off-camera, was barely 
recognizable. However, when Lenz uploaded the video of 18-month-old Holden to 
YouTube, she titled it Let’s Go Crazy #1 —making it easy for Prince’s record label, 
454
X. BURROUGH AND E. ERICKSONUniversal Music Group, to find it with a Web crawler and send Google a takedown 
notice, via the copyright holder’s prerogative outlined in the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA).5 For the next six months, anyone looking for the video—
namely, Holden’s relatives—would get the ubiquitous YouTube apology: “We’re sorry, 
this video is no longer available” ( Figure 34.2 ).
After YouTube removed the video, Lenz was warned that additional copyright infringe -
ments would force the company to cancel her account. Lenz submitted a counternotifica -
tion arguing fair use. By the time Google reposted the video months later, Lenz was ready 
for action. Aided by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), she sued Universal, arguing 
that it had violated her First Amendment rights by demanding the removal of her video 
without considering the likelihood of fair use. Universal filed a motion to dismiss, pointing 
out that the DMCA makes no mention of fair use. But in August 2008 a US District judge 
refused to dismiss the case, ruling that copyright owners must indeed consider whether 
their content has been used within the parameters of fair use before issuing a takedown 
notice.6 Recognizing that this precedent could profoundly change the ease with which it 
currently uses the DMCA, Universal went through several more legal contortions to make 
the Lenz case go away. However, in March 2010, the judge ruled against the company’s 
motion for dismissal again, bringing Lenz closer to the courtroom.7 In January 2013 
Corynne McSherry reported on the EFF’s website that the court “clarified that [the] ‘con -
sideration’” of fair use, “means making an actual legal determination.”8
Although Stephanie Lenz’s video was ultimately reposted on YouTube, her case illus -
trates how easy it is, under the DMCA guidelines, for content owners to see user-gener -
ated content (UGC) removed from the Web when it contains copyrighted material, 
even if that material is clearly fair use—with no profit motive or likely economic harm 
to the content owner. Her case also holds the possibility of ending, or at least changing, 
this current paradigm, in which UGC creators are held guilty of copyright infringement 
(i.e., losing the right to post their remixes, parodies, mashups, and home videos) until 
proven innocent.
Figure 34.2  A likeness to the ubiquitous YouTube “sad face”
455
GOING CRAZY WITH REMIXThis case provides a nuanced example of the challenges content creators face. As an 
educator, this case was low-hanging fruit on the pedagogical tree. My students—who 
have been bombarded with what Lessig calls the “War on Piracy”9—increasingly under -
stand that file sharing is illegal, but are much less clear about other uses of copyrighted 
content online. This vagueness isn’t helped by the massive number of takedown notices 
issued by content holders—which, as Lenz v. Universal  demonstrates—is undertaken 
without  considering fair use.
I felt good about using the case as a real-world teaching tool, but I also have to admit 
to my frustration with the politics of the case. It is hard to reconcile a large publishing 
company antagonizing a mother and her young son. I wanted to contribute to Lenz’s 
battle—I wanted to put up hundreds of videos with that old Crazy song in it. Therefore, 
as we waited for a definitive ruling on Lenz, the project in this case study demonstrates 
one method of online solidarity: bombard them with remixes.
Specs
In the classroom, Lenz v. Universal  is a didactic tool, used to demonstrate how to 
create UGC with a rich understanding of fair use doctrine. But for all practical 
purposes, assigning the remix project was a way to create many more videos, most 
using the same snippet of Prince’s song, that are obviously critiquing or commenting 
upon the case.
Henry Jenkins writes, “More and more literacy experts are recognizing that enacting, 
reciting, and appropriating elements from preexisting stories is a valuable and organic 
part of the process by which children develop cultural literacy.”10 Creating “preexisting 
stories” with social media could be as simple as updating a Facebook or MySpace page—
as 18-year-old Skyler told danah boyd, “If you’re not on MySpace, you don’t exist.”11 
Status updates, and other media published online, are not just technical exercises. These 
activities aid developmental learning in the growth of digital media literacy for students 
of the networked era. If students can post status updates to Facebook, they can “rip, mix, 
and burn”12 (or upload) for Web participation. The remix project assigned to my stu -
dents was a call to action and a platform for participation. I hope that students entering 
college classrooms in the next few years will say, “If you’re not creating new commentary, 
you don’t exist.”
First, we watched Lenz’s original video. I asked a class of 20 students if they recognized 
the song in the background of the video. While one student could name the song and 
its author, many failed to notice the background music. We discussed the case, which 
provided an opportunity to review fair use doctrine. Then we dissected Lenz’s video into 
parts: the aesthetic treatment, the script, camera movements, and so on. My students 
were to create a remix of Lenz’s original video or develop a parody in which it made 
sense to use Prince’s song ( Figure 34.3 ). Their videos had to be exactly 29 seconds (the 
same as the original) and posted to YouTube as a video response (a feature YouTube no 
longer supports)13 to Let’s Go Crazy #1 . I had a feeling Universal would be unlikely to 
continue issuing takedown notices on or near Lenz’s account while they were still avoid -
ing the courts. To this day, only one of my students (and there were more than 100) has 
received a takedown notice.
Coincidentally, in the process of bombarding Universal with remixes, we were also 
bombarding Stephanie Lenz. At the time, video responses required authorization for 
publication on YouTube from the original author. So Stephanie learned of our class 
456
X. BURROUGH AND E. ERICKSONproject the first time students submitted their assignments. As a result, my students 
interviewed Ms. Lenz and we developed a website for the project to publish their inter -
view ( Figure 34.4 ).14
Figuring a Better Way
Lawrence Lessig defines our networked culture as “RW” (read/write), in contrast to the 
“RO” (read-only) culture that once dominated our media landscape. Since today’s com -
munication methods commonly include downloading, editing, recreating, and upload -
ing, Lessig and others call for a reform of copyright law, end-user license agreements, or 
the definition of “authorship.” Lessig writes, “It is time we call a truce, and figure a better 
way. And a better way means redefining the system of law we call copyright so that 
ordinary, normal behavior is not called criminal.”15
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) issued the 
report, “Participative Web: User-Created Content” to understand the newest feature of 
society and the economy, “wide creative participation in developing digital content, 
driven by rapidly diffusing broadband access and new software tools.”16 Without a con -
crete definition for UGC, the committee developed the following guidelines for under -
standing it: (1) it must be published online; (2) creative effort is necessary;17 and (3) it 
must be made outside of professional practices. This portion of the guidelines virtually 
requires that UGC remain an amateur effort; and Lenz’s video fulfills the OECD’s defini -
tion. It was published online, expressed creativity—in the form of dance, and emerged 
from an unambiguously personal sphere. As Ian Chuang notes, “the crux of Lenz’s argu -
ment was that copyright holders cannot, in good faith, order materials taken down 
without first considering the issue of fair use.”18 This is the argument that would be used 
in future cases if amateur UGC creators had to defend themselves against (most likely, 
corporate) copyright holders.
Figure 34.3   Since video responses are no longer available (or searchable), student video 
responses to Lenz’s work can be viewed on the YouTube playlist: http://www.
youtube.com/playlist?list=PLC8F47F3AD251E99C (courtesy of xtine 
burrough)
457
GOING CRAZY WITH REMIXA directory of rulings in regards to artworks that rely on mimicking original works, 
such as those intending to create parody, satire, or appropriation in a fine arts context, 
demonstrate that this type of expression is risky. Mark Sableman writes, “as with copy -
right and trademark, several key rulings have placed legitimate artistic use of the content 
of today’s culture at risk.”19 Challenges particular to UGC have to do with authorship 
and the current licensing process. Laura Heymann suggests the term “author” is used too 
broadly, as she writes,
one’s notion of how the word should be described might align not only with the 
kind of creative work one does (or engages with) but also with one’s sense of 
what the scope of the legal rights attached to authorship should be.20
Heymann suggests traditional authors  were motivated by economic forces, unlike new 
authors who create “new and imaginative works, often by incorporating or commenting 
on the works of others.”21 These new authors are not limited to producing UGC, but for 
Figure 34.4   The complete interview with Stephanie Lenz is available on letsgocrazy.
info/interview.html
458
X. BURROUGH AND E. ERICKSONour purposes this is a clear example of Heymann’s suggestion. When UGC takes the 
form of remix, mashup, or parody, the expression necessarily relies on directly referenc -
ing contemporary culture.22 Heymann calls for copyright law to account for authors’ 
motivations and intentions instead of emphasizing the artistic product. Biederman and 
Andrews’s contractual differentiation provides another binary relationship to Heymann’s 
“old authors/new authors” conundrum. The old authors saw content creators and dis -
tributors enter into “binding, bilaterally negotiated contracts, including representations 
and warranties, indemnification clauses, and other familiar language allocating their 
respective liabilities and designating ownership rights,”23 while new authors (as in UGC 
creators) are presented with nonnegotiable end-user license agreements (EULAs). As 
Biederman and Andrews point out, “UGC copyright ownership issues are usually dealt 
with at two distinct periods in the content creation process, either: (1) the front end 
(contractually); or (2) the back end (through litigation).”24
Fair use doctrine requires a four-part investigation for balance between: (1) the pur -
pose of the derivative work; (2) the nature of the content (for example, facts versus crea -
tive content); (3) the amount of original work used in the derivative; and (4) the effect 
that the new work has on the actual or potential market value of the original. UGC 
creators must be aware of how to balance these factors. Since today’s students are likely 
to participate in generating content for the Web, teaching fair use is a pedagogical 
imperative. However, fair use cases are evaluated individually, so it is often seen as a 
defense rather than a “category of activity that is not infringement in the first place.”25 
Heymann concludes, “too much deference is given to copyright owners’ interests and 
too little to defendants’ needs to use copyrighted works”;26 and Rebecca Ganz reiterates, 
“The main problem with fair use is that it is currently applied on a case-by-case basis.”27
Cultural production, viewed through the lens of art history, includes practices of collage 
and juxtaposition. Henry Jenkins alludes to cultural production as “the displacement of 
folk culture by mass media.”28 Photographer and collage artist John Baldessari argues that 
since images are so similar to words, neither should be owned.29 While I appreciate these 
new possibilities for governance (all related to the second challenge in determining fair 
use), media creators and educators should focus on the first challenge while developing an 
understanding of fair use. In university curricula, this means teaching the fair use doctrine 
alongside the practice-based activities of downloading, editing, recreating, and uploading. 
In his introduction to Remix , Lessig credits Jack Valenti for his insightful question about a 
college student who admitted to downloading music in violation of the copyright law: 
“What kind of moral platform will sustain this young man in later life?”30
We wish we had the answer. In the meantime, pedagogy combining fair use doctrine 
with UGC activity develops a moral platform to sustain students until policy makers 
accommodate Web practices, such as the Lenz remix project, that are already protected 
by the fair use doctrine.
Notes
 1 Greg Lefevre, “Dancing Baby Cha-Chas from the Internet to the Networks,” CNN, last modified January 
19, 1998, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/9801/19/dancing.baby/index.html.
 2 The term meme —“a unit of cultural transmission”—was coined by Richard Dawkins, in his 1976 classic, 
The Selfish Gene  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006 edition), 192.
 3 Ibid., 7.
 4 Stephanie Lenz, “Let’s Go Crazy #1,” YouTube, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1KfJHFWlhQ.
 5 DMCA 2006: 17 USC § 512.
459
GOING CRAZY WITH REMIX 6 Lenz v. Universal Music Corp., 572 F . Supp. 2d 1150 (ND Cal. 2008).
 7 Lenz v. Universal Music Corp., LEXIS 16899 (ND Cal. 2010).
 8 Corynne McSherry, “Lenz v. Universal: This Baby May Be Dancing to Trial,” Electronic Frontier Foundation , 
January 28, 2013, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/01/lenz-v-universal-baby-may-be-dancing-trial-0.
 9 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York: Penguin, 
2008), xv–xvii.
10 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide  (New York: New York University 
Press, 2006), 177.
11 danah boyd, “Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage 
Social Life,” in MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Learning—Youth, Identity, and Digital Media Volume , 
ed. David Buckingham (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), last modified March 30, 2010. http://www.
danah.org/papers/WhyYouthHeart.pdf, 1.
12 This was the slogan Apple Computers used to sell the first version of iTunes. See Apple Computers, 
“Archived—Rip, Mix, Burn Defined,” Apple , February 18, 2012, http://support.apple.com/kb/
TA44040?viewlocale=en_US.
13 Josh Ong, “Google is Removing Video Responses on YouTube from September 12 Due to Low 
Engagement,” The Next Web , August 28, 2013, http://thenextweb.com/google/2013/08/28/google-is-
removing-video-responses-on-youtube-from-september-12-due-to-low-engagement/#!u4u6e.
14 Stephanie Lenz, “Interview, Winter 2009,” Let’s Go Crazy! Teaching Media Literacy with Remix Practices , 
http://www.letsgocrazy.info/interview.html.
15 Lessig, Remix , xix.
16 Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry, Committee for Information, Computer and 
Communications Policy, “Participative Web: User-Created Content,” Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, April 12, 2007, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf.
17 The commission wrote, “a certain amount of creative effort was put into creating the work or adapting 
existing works to construct a new one.”
18 Ian Chuang, “Be Wary of Adding Your Own Soundtrack: Lenz v. Universal and How the Fair Use Policy 
Should Be Applied to User Generated Content,” Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review  29, no. 
2 (2009), 166.
19 Mark Sableman, “Artistic Expression Today: Can Artists Use the Language of Our Culture?” Saint Louis 
University Law Journal  52, no. 1 (2007): 206.
20 Laura A. Heymann, “A Tale of (At Least) T wo Authors: Focusing Copyright Law on Process Over 
Product,” The Journal of Corporation Law  34 (2009): 1010.
21 Ibid.
22 Sableman, “Artistic Expression Today.”
23 Charles J. Biederman and Danny Andrews, “Applying Copyright Law to User-Generated Content,” 
Practice Tips, Los Angeles Lawyer  31, no. 3 (2008): 12.
24 Ibid., 14.
25 Heymann, “A Tale of (At Least) T wo Authors,” 1032.
26 Ibid.
27 Rebecca F . Ganz, “A Portrait of the Artist’s Estate As a Copyright Problem,” Loyola of Los Angeles Law 
Review  41, no. 2 (2008): 755.
28 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture , 135.
29 Baldessari says, “I just don’t think imagery should be owned, including my own. If it’s part of our world, 
it’s like owning words, I mean, how could you own words? I mean, it’s stuff to use.” Art21, Inc. , Producers 
Wesley Miler, Nick Ravish, 2009, accessed online at Wooster Collective. John Baldessari, “On The 
Origins of Copy and Paste Culture,” http://www.woostercollective.com/2010/02/john_baldessari_on_
the_origins_of_copy_a.html.
30 Lessig, Remix , 10.
Bibliography
Apple Computers. “Rip, Mix, Burn Defined.” Apple . Last modified February 18, 2012. http://support.
apple.com/kb/TA44040?viewlocale=en_US (accessed August 19, 2014).
Baldessari, John. “On The Origins of Copy and Paste Culture.” Art21, Inc.  Prods. Wesley Miler, Nick 
Ravish, Wooster Collective, 2009. http://www.woostercollective.com/2010/02/john_baldessari_on_
the_origins_of_copy_a.html (accessed February 2010).
460
X. BURROUGH AND E. ERICKSONBiederman, Charles J., and Danny Andrews. “Applying Copyright Law to User-Generated Content.” 
Practice Tips, Los Angeles Lawyer  31, no. 3 (2008): 12–18.
boyd, danah. “Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage 
Social Life.” In MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Learning—Youth, Identity, and Digital Media 
Volume , edited by David Buckingham. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Last modified March 30, 2010. 
http://www.danah.org/papers/WhyYouthHeart.pdf (accessed August 19, 2014).
Chuang, Ian. “Be Wary of Adding Your Own Soundtrack: Lenz v. Universal and How the Fair Use 
Policy Should Be Applied to User Generated Content.” Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law 
Review  29, no. 2 (2009): 163–191.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry, Committee for Information, Computer and 
Communications Policy. “Participative Web: User-Created Content.” Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development , April 12, 2007. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf 
(accessed August 19, 2014).
Ganz, Rebecca F . “A Portrait of the Artist’s Estate As a Copyright Problem.” Loyola of Los Angeles Law 
Review  41, no. 2 (2008): 739–762.
Heymann, Laura A. “A Tale of (At Least) T wo Authors: Focusing Copyright Law on Process Over 
Product.” The Journal of Corporation Law  34 (2009): 1009–1032.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide . New York: New York 
University Press, 2006.
Lefevre, Greg. “Dancing Baby Cha-Chas from the Internet to the Networks.” CNN.com , Last modified 
January 19, 1998. http://www.cnn.com/TECH/9801/19/dancing.baby/index.html (accessed August 
19, 2014).
Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York: The 
Penguin Press, 2008.
Lenz, Stephanie. “Interview, Winter 2009.” Let’s Go Crazy! Teaching Media Literacy with Remix Practices . 
http://www.letsgocrazy.info/interview.html (accessed February 9, 2014).
——. Let’s Go Crazy #1 . YouTube. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1KfJHFWlhQ (accessed 
October 14, 2013).
Lenz v. Universal Music Corp. 572 F . Supp. 2d  1150. N.D. Cal. 2008.
——. LEXIS  16899. N.D. Cal. 2010.
McSherry, Corynne. “Lenz v. Universal: This Baby May Be Dancing to Trial.” Electronic Frontier 
Foundation , January 28, 2013. https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/01/lenz-v-universal-baby-may-be-
dancing-trial-0 (accessed August 19, 2014).
Ong, Josh. “Google is removing video responses on YouTube from September 12 due to low 
engagement.” The Next Web . August 28, 2013. http://thenextweb.com/google/2013/08/28/google-
is-removing-video-responses-on-youtube-from-september-12-due-to-low-engagement/#!u4u6e 
(accessed August 19, 2014).
Rushkoff, Douglas. Media Virus! New York: Ballantine Books, 1994.
Sableman, Mark. “Artistic Expression Today: Can Artists Use the Language of Our Culture?” Saint 
Louis University Law Journal  52, no. 1 (2007): 187–218.
35
A REMIX ARTIST AND 
ADVOCATE
Desiree D’Alessandro
Remix is everywhere. Examples are published on YouTube, televised programming, and 
songs topping our radio charts. When Robin Thicke’s “Blurred Lines” aired, I immedi -
ately recognized the reminiscent undertones of Marvin Gaye’s 1970s hit “Got to Give 
It Up.”1 My inner-geek rejoiced when Kickstarter fan pledges helped launch OverClocked 
(OC) Remix’s Balance and Ruin , an album inspired by the music of Final Fantasy VI .2 I 
laughed while watching the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con International panel for AMC’s 
The Walking Dead , where producers and cast members joked about character romance 
fan-fiction in front of a cheering audience.3 I have attended Metrocon and witnessed 
cosplayers create costumes that hybridize characters from different series and celebrate 
user-created Anime Music Videos (AMV) and self-circulated doujinshi .4 All of these 
exemplify the inherent inclusivity of remix; a quality that I have always embraced and 
advocated.
In his popular four-part series Everything is a Remix , Kirby Ferguson defines remix as 
the process of combining or editing existing materials to produce something new.5 
Remix is far from being an emergent phenomenon, as appropriation and repurposing 
strategies are inherent to creativity itself and the very process of cultural production.6 
Remix has evolved to be prominent in a variety of forums—video excerpts, online 
video, music, literature, fashion, and more. It is exercised by big companies and  
industries with the finances to handle their own licensing and lawyer fees, as well as by 
individuals without extensive assets. Unfortunately, these individuals potentially face 
penalties under the continuous predominant control of the copyright holder. Since the 
conception of intellectual property, this concept has overpowered that of the common 
good, resulting in the authority of the copyright holder frequently trumping the creative 
remix endeavors and potential of the general public.
Remix and Art: My Evolving Practice
Remix has been integral to my evolving practice as an artist. As an undergraduate at the 
University of South Florida, I created multimedia installations and works that incorpo -
rated media from popular culture and audience engagement. In the Fine Art Graduate 
program at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), I learned to 
462
D. D’ALESSANDROcontextualize my practice through critical theory and was encouraged to explore my 
interest in the dynamic relationship between source material, the individual, and the 
social. My work continues to question and investigate a variety of issues through a 
concept-driven process while exploring a wide range of production methods. The fol -
lowing brief overview of my remix videos hosted on YouTube demonstrates the tone of 
my practice and outlines some of my history of exercising fair use.
My first “World Fair Use Day” remixes existed as promotional trailers for Public 
Knowledge’s First Annual World’s Fair Use Day (WFUD), held in Washington, DC in 
2010 ( Figure 35.1 ).7 Both utilized film footage from The Ten Commandments  (1956), 
with the intention of reinterpreting the role of Moses as the messiah of fair use, leading 
the people out of their copyright-restricted bondage ( Figure 35.2 ).
My next remix, “World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course Consumption,” explored 
water conservation and hydropolitics after I discovered that California is one of the 
leading golf course-congested states in the US ( Figure 35.3 ).8 This video aimed to spread 
awareness and expose how corporations maneuver to convert a critical world resource 
into a profitable commodity.
Soon after the release of my “World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course Consumption” 
remix, I faced DMCA violation complications with the UCSB Office of Judicial Affairs 
(further reflection on this to follow). I created a reactionary video titled “WHAT?! 
DMCA Violation ( Step Brothers  Remix)” that showcased Will Ferrell and John C. Reilly 
hysterically reacting to the Internet ban placed on my UC-networked computer  
(Figure 35.4 ).9
Figure 35.1   “World Fair Use Day,” Desiree D’Alessandro, via YouTube (courtesy of 
Desiree D’Alessandro)
Figure 35.2   Moses as the messiah of fair use, leading the people out of their copyright-
restricted bondage, Desiree D’Alessandro, via YouTube (courtesy of Desiree 
D’Alessandro)
Figure 35.3   “World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course Consumption,” Desiree 
D’Alessandro, via YouTube (courtesy of Desiree D’Alessandro)
464
D. D’ALESSANDRONext, “Woman Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver Remix)” featured a cinematic 
montage that highlighted Weaver’s career of conflicting sexualized character personas, 
though she is presented as an icon of female power in popular culture ( Figure 35.5 ).10 
The iconic horror narrator John Newland from One Step Beyond (1959) is utilized to 
draw public attention to the discord between Weaver’s reputation and cinematic record.
Will Ferrell and John C. Reilly were revisited in “Open Video Conference ( Step 
Brothers  Remix)” to promote the Open Video Conference held in New York City, 2010 
(Figure 35.6 ).11 The film narrative was transformed to showcase a RIAA and MPAA 
agent crashing a meeting and getting an appropriate welcome by open video and fair use 
representatives.
Lastly, “Ronda Rousey—She’s a Lady ( UFC  Remix)” is my most recent remix to date 
(Figure 35.7 ).12 This work featured Tom Jones’s 1971 hit “She’s a Lady” and footage 
featuring UFC Women’s Bantamweight Champion, Ronda Rousey. The intention was 
to highlight a humorous and simultaneously critical juxtaposition between the emer -
gence of this strong/lethal female celebrity against past tropes regarding female delicacy, 
domesticity, and decency.
In addition to embracing a variety of addressed topics, my work also incorporates 
remix beyond the digital playback head. My recent projects mashup the disciplines of 
performance art and athleticism through boxing, hybridizing the two with the aim to 
address questions in terms of contemporary sports and gender studies. These pieces were 
directly inspired by the debut of women’s amateur boxing in the 2012 London Olympic 
games and the profound impact of boxing on my relationship with my father. I remember 
watching televised fights throughout my childhood and growing up inspired by Sylvester 
Stallone’s performance in the Rocky  series. With the aim to dissolve traditional fields 
Figure 35.4   “WHAT?! DMCA Violation (Step Brothers Remix),” Desiree D’Alessandro, 
via YouTube (courtesy of Desiree D’Alessandro)
465
A REMIX ARTIST AND ADVOCATE
Figure 35.5   “Woman Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver Remix),” Desiree 
D’Alessandro, via YouTube (courtesy of Desiree D’Alessandro)
Figure 35.6   “Open Video Conference (Step Brothers Remix),” Desiree D’Alessandro, 
via YouTube (courtesy of Desiree D’Alessandro)
466
D. D’ALESSANDROand boundaries, I implemented a rigorous artist-turned-athlete training regimen as the 
focus of my Master’s thesis efforts, and shortly after graduation and returning home, I 
earned the 2012 Florida Novice Middleweight Champion titles for USA Boxing and 
Golden Gloves. This was a way for me to explore new conceptual ground while operating  
within the seemingly disparate rings of organized sports and performance art.
Remix and Resistance: Recounting My DMCA Violation
As a preface to the experience I am about to share, I want to emphasize that it is not my 
intention to speak against the university, given the circumstances that transpired. I am 
truly grateful for the incredible graduate experience, knowledgeable faculty mentors, and 
opportunities that the school provided. The lack of institutional support or aid in 
defense when I faced a first-time DMCA violation is a systemic problem that is in no 
way exclusive only to the UCSB.
When I first delved into generating online remix videos, I began the process of acquiring 
source materials to reconstruct and recontextualize new narratives. In order to gather these 
sources, I did what any digitally savvy remixer would do: I turned to the Internet. Clips were 
found primarily through YouTube and scarcer sources were acquired through peer-to-peer 
(P2P) applications. Feeling successful in the remixes I generated, with multiple screenings 
on campus and the support of my department faculty and peers, I awoke one morning to 
discover that UCSB had banned my UC-networked Internet connection. Note that 
Residential Networking (ResNet) registration is mandatory for students who live on campus. 
The locked new homepage displayed the following alerting red typeface: “THIS DEVICE 
HAS BEEN BLOCKED DUE TO A DMCA VIOLATION” ( Figure 35.8 ).
Figure 35.7   “Ronda Rousey—She’s a Lady (UFC Remix),” Desiree D’Alessandro, via 
YouTube (courtesy of Desiree D’Alessandro)
467
A REMIX ARTIST AND ADVOCATEI immediately contacted my campus DMCA Agent and Judicial Affairs Assistant 
Coordinator to appeal the allegation and lift the ban placed on my computer. To my 
surprise, the bureaucratic responses from authoritative sources led nowhere. I explained 
that generating online remix videos requires appropriating sources. They informed me 
this was not important. When I defended my efforts with numerous department faculty 
members ready to write letters to attest to the legitimacy of my work, they informed me 
that this did not matter. There was no opportunity for me to justify the use of the mate -
rial in my practice or attempt to contextualize the downloaded files.
UCSB does not examine DMCA complaints on a case-by-case basis. Any acquiring 
and/or sharing copyrighted source materials violates their ResNetTerms of Services.13 I 
noted that the UCSB Judicial Affairs Homepage claimed, “All activities, programs, and 
everyday interactions are enriched by our acceptance of one another, and the knowledge 
we gain when we learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and 
mutual respect.”14 I emphasized that my efforts were not being respected. Though down -
loading content can lead to illegal copyright infringement, there is a chance that the 
utilization of such sources could lead to educational purposes and commentary on cul -
ture, which is protected by the First Amendment. Through this collective university 
ban, the opportunity to appropriate for critical and creative expression is withheld from 
students who have a right to engage in fair use. The assertion of fair use plays a vital role 
in the broader range of activities that evidence the poor fit between today’s copyright 
policy and the limitations on creative practices.15
After all my efforts to explain and defend myself were dismissed, the UCSB DMCA 
Agent reaffirmed that in order to protect itself and its students the university has a 
responsibility to uphold its policy against violators, with no exceptions.16 The Agent 
said any further resistance would potentially lead to serious repercussions, hefty lawyer 
fees, and even charges. It was also revealed that in the prior four years (2006–10), no 
Figure 35.8   Screenshot of the locked UCSB Internet home page (courtesy of Desiree 
D’Alessandro)
468
D. D’ALESSANDROone at UCSB had filed a counternotice, the procedure with which one can appeal with 
a fair use claim. I was disappointed and frustrated by the steadfast university policy put 
in place for fear of liability pursuits.
I often wonder what would have happened if I had stood my ground and effectively filed 
a counternotice. I was forced to choose between potentially facing serious repercussions, 
or accepting the first-time offense penalty, which entailed residential Internet ban for 30 
days. I felt defeated when I was forced to a sign a Notice of Copyright Infringement, in 
keeping with the policy for a first-time violation. Second and third offenses included an 
Internet ban for one year or indefinitely, and jeopardized housing and academic enroll -
ment status at the university. It would have been useful to maintain official documents to 
review the specific details of this entire experience. When I requested a physical copy of 
my case file and the associated accusation list of infringed instances, as well as the name 
of the company or copyright holder who filed the DMCA notice, my request was denied.
Remix and Advocacy: Towards a Generative Future
Remix is a viable practice and should be encouraged and unrestricted in order to generate  
new forms of creative expression. Today, lawsuits abound and the widespread fear of 
“pirates” stealing intellectual property persists. We must remember that remix has been 
integral to the development of our culture throughout the ages. Inventor and author 
Stephen Key declares “Anyone who claims to have developed a totally original idea is 
ignorant  . . . Ideas have and do influence all of us, all the time. New ideas are usually 
formed by mixing and matching older ideas.”17 Science and art rarely spring forth in a 
vacuum, and the Copyright Act in many ways limits opportunities that build upon, 
reinterpret, and reconceive existing works.18 But the battle between the rights of copy -
right holders and users has become further complicated through technology as Internet-
fueled fears have changed the legal and cultural landscape in dramatic ways.19
Consider the Internet and its evolution from the 1960s Advanced Research Projects 
Agency Network (ARPANET) progenitor. ARPANET was designed to survive network 
losses and facilitate information sharing and access for researchers. Ironically, its develop -
ment is closely tied with the University of California, as UCLA and UCSB played integral 
roles on the eve of electronic communication. Yet today, every campus in the system has 
a DMCA Agent on staff and bans information sharing via P2P applications in accordance 
with the Responsible Use Policy. What was once a progressive academic force has been 
unfortunately reduced to one of restriction and restraint. DMCA is ineffective because it 
fails to prevent unauthorized duplication of copyrighted goods and only succeeds in cur -
tailing freedoms and criminalizing legitimate research.20 Harvard political activist, 
Lawrence Lessig, reminds us of the poignant outcome: an architecture of control.21
The complexities of the Internet and our everyday integration with digital technologies 
have created a world enveloped in copyright consideration. Access to the Internet is criti -
cal, social networking sites are widespread, and digitally formatted images, videos, and 
music are necessary elements of the digital communication system. Lessig explains that 
digital networks inevitably function by making copies, thus every single use of creative 
work in the digital environment triggers copyright.22 With this consideration in mind, 
Lessig affirms that “If copyright regulates copies, and copying is as common as breathing, 
then a law that triggers federal regulation on copying is a law that regulates too far.”23
Lessig is not alone in this sentiment. Remixers, pop culture pirates, and culture jammers 
are speaking out, fighting back against takedown notices, defending themselves against 
469
A REMIX ARTIST AND ADVOCATEnetwork surveillance, and taking advantage of the generative technology we now house 
in our pockets. Enthusiastic individuals including newsmakers, world changers, visionar -
ies, and innovators understand that more respect to the creators must be acknowledged to 
neutralize the imbalance of power in the current system where the hierarchy of power 
recognizes the rights of publishers first, authors second, and the public a distant third.24 
This imbalance between individuals and corporations contradicts copyright’s constitu -
tional mandate where the monopoly power of copyright was designed first and foremost to 
benefit society by stimulating new creative works as opposed to providing special private 
benefits to individuals or corporations.25 In response, several forward-thinking organiza -
tions and universities have already shown how powerful open access to collections, materi -
als, and research can be.26 Access to digital sources is vital for opportunities of expression 
and the proliferation of today’s user-generated culture, and users should be able to access 
this content in order to critique the society in which we live.
In closing, I realize that the works that I have generated and events that I have expe -
rienced will all help shape and inform my practice in the future. I am grateful for these 
experiences that have established my emergent career and enabled me to speak about 
remix at numerous conferences and festivals, in academic journals, and publications in 
dialog with esteemed remixers. We are in a critical moment in history with copyright 
reformation inevitably on the horizon. Fueled by our awareness and ignited by the rec -
ognition of remixers as viable contributors to our cultural dialog, we must unite in the 
name of progress to defend our right to articulate our voices in the twenty-first century. 
I look forward to continuing to explore remix in my practice and participating in part 
of a much larger collective.
Notes
 1 Thicke and song co-writers are involved in an unresolved lawsuit with the Gaye estate. The Gaye estate 
and publishing company have reached a confidential settlement.
 2 The OverClocked Remix, “Final Fantasy VI: Balance and Ruin,” http://ff6.ocremix.org. Initial disputes 
between Square-Enix and album producers were resolved.
 3 AMC Network, “Comic-Con Panel 2013: The Walking Dead ,” http://www.amctv.com/the-walking-dead/
videos/comic-con-panel-2013-the-walking-dead.
 4 Metrocon is Florida’s largest anime convention. For more information, see http://metroconventions.com.
 5 Kirby Ferguson, “Everything is a Remix Part 1 : The Song Remains the Same,” Vimeo video, 7:18, 2011, 
http://everythingisaremix.info/watch-the-series.
 6 The Remix Cinema, “What is Remix?” http://archive.today/1NYYF .
 7 Desiree D’Alessandro, “World Fair Use Day I,” YouTube video, 0:38, http://youtu.be/qWg5U3nKY2Q; 
and “World Fair Use Day II,” YouTube video, 0:45, http://youtu.be/l0W0pA_ZIn8. Both December 26, 
2009 and accessed March 15, 2014.
 8 Desiree D’Alessandro, “World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course Consumption,” YouTube video, 3:12, 
November 24, 2009, http://youtu.be/UXWSWatszBQ (accessed March 15, 2014).
 9 Desiree D’Alessandro, “WHAT?! DMCA Violation ( Step Brothers  Remix),” YouTube video, 0:30, January 
3, 2010, http://youtu.be/aFx4yTUFtWY (accessed March 15, 2014).
10 Desiree D’Alessandro, “Woman Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver Remix),” YouTube video, 1:23, 
August, 30, 2010, http://youtu.be/C_VPriU6te0 (accessed March 15, 2014).
11 Desiree D’Alessandro, “Open Video Conference ( Step Brothers  Remix),” YouTube video, 1:16, October 
4, 2010, http://youtu.be/uFRNOEHm2Y8 (accessed March 15, 2014).
12 Desiree D’Alessandro, “Ronda Rousey—She’s a Lady (UFC Remix),” YouTube video, 3:21, January 19, 
2014, http://youtu.be/svtLnjXwDUc (accessed March 15, 2014).
13 University of California, Santa Barbara, “ResNet: DMCA Policy,” Housing and Residential Services, 
http://www.housing.ucsb.edu/resnet/dmca-policy.
14 University of California, Santa Barbara, “Judicial Affairs: Home,” Housing and Residential Services, 
http://www.housing.ucsb.edu/judicial-affairs.
470
D. D’ALESSANDRO15 Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright  (Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press, 2011), 15.
16 University of California, Santa Barbara, “ResNet: DMCA Policy.”
17 Stephen Key, “What Robin Thicke’s ‘Blurred Lines’ Can Teach You About Stealing Ideas,” Entrepreneur , 
August 20, 2013, http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/227986.
18 Ashley Packard, Digital Law  (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 184.
19 Kembrew McLeod, Freedom of Expression: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property  
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007), 4.
20 Ibid.
21 Lawrence Lessig, The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World  (New York, NY: 
Vintage, 2002), 268.
22 Lawrence Lessig, Code 2.0: Version 2.0  (New York, NY: SoHo Books, 2010), 268.
23 Lawrence Lessig, Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy  (New York, NY: Penguin, 
2008), 269.
24 Siva Vaidhyanathan, Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How it Threatens 
Creativity  (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2003), 11.
25 McLeod, Freedom of Expression , 9.
26 James Cuno, “Open Content, An Idea Whose Time Has Come,” The Getty: Iris, http://blogs.getty.edu/
iris/open-content-an-idea-whose-time-has-come. The Getty, Walters Art Museum, the National Gallery 
of Art, Yale University, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and Harvard University now support 
digital access.
Bibliography
AMC Network. “Comic-Con Panel 2013: The Walking Dead .” http://www.amctv.com/the-walking-
dead/videos/comic-con-panel-2013-the-walking-dead (accessed March 15, 2014).
Aufderheide, Patricia and Peter Jaszi. Reclaiming Fair Use: How to Put Balance Back in Copyright . 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Cuno, James. “Open Content, An Idea Whose Time Has Come.” The Getty: Iris . http://blogs.getty.edu/
iris/open-content-an-idea-whose-time-has-come (accessed September 30, 2013).
Ferguson, Kirby. “Everything is a Remix Part 1 : The Song Remains the Same.” Vimeo video, 7:18. 
2011. http://everythingisaremix.info/watch-the-series (accessed March 15, 2014).
Ferguson, Russell. Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1990.
Key, Stephen. “What Robin Thicke’s ‘Blurred Lines’ Can Teach You About Stealing Ideas.” 
Entrepreneur . August 20, 2013. http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/227986 (accessed March 15, 
2014).
Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World . New York, NY: 
Vintage, 2002.
——. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy . New York, NY: Penguin, 2008.
——. Code 2.0: Version 2.0 . New York, NY: SoHo Books, 2010.
McLeod, Kembrew. Freedom of Expression: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property . 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
OverClocked Remix. “Final Fantasy VI: Balance and Ruin ,” http://ff6.ocremix.org (accessed March 15, 
2014).
Packard, Ashley. Digital Law . Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
The Remix Cinema, “What is Remix?” http://archive.today/1NYYF (accessed August 19, 2014).
University of California, Santa Barbara. “Judicial Affairs: Home.” Housing and Residential Services. 
http://www.housing.ucsb.edu/judicial-affairs (accessed March 15, 2014).
——. “ResNet: DMCA Policy.” Housing and Residential Services. http://www.housing.ucsb.edu/
resnet/dmca-policy (accessed March 15, 2014).
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The Rise of Intellectual Property and How it Threatens 
Creativity . New York, NY: New York University Press, 2003.
36
OCCUPY/BAND AID 
MASHUP
“Do They Know It’s Christmas?”
Owen Gallagher
In this chapter, I will discuss Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , a work I produced as part of a 
series of three critical remix videos in 2011. I will describe the context that led to the 
concept and creation of this piece, as well as my political and aesthetic intentions and 
the reasons informing my choice of subject matter. Finally, I will contextualize this work 
within the field of remix and video art and relate it to my own remix practice over the 
past decade, as well as my ongoing research in visual culture, focusing on critical remix.
Background and Context
Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  was produced and published just before Christmas 2011, three 
months after the Occupy Wall Street protests began in New York and a year after the 
Arab Spring uprisings began in Tunisia. I was living in Bahrain (a tiny Middle Eastern 
island kingdom nestled between Saudi Arabia and Iran), spending Christmas away from 
family and friends in Ireland for the first time. I had witnessed firsthand the response of 
Middle Eastern authorities to protesters, including the destruction of a symbolic protest 
monument, Bahrain’s “Pearl Roundabout” in March 2011.1 By December, a number of 
related events had occurred within a short time of each other. Arab Spring protests were 
in full bloom in Syria, Egypt, and Yemen; the Libyan people were celebrating their free -
dom for the first time in 42 years, following the death of Muammar al-Qadaffi two 
months earlier;2 and Occupy Wall Street protesters had just attempted a reoccupation 
to mark their three-month anniversary, but failed, due to New York city police 
intervention.3
Being away from home, I felt compelled to enter the global conversation with a remix 
video using news and documentary footage of the Arab Spring and Occupy movements. 
One of the aims of this remix was to try to bring together a set of visually incongruous 
material to highlight the similarities and connections between various crises occurring 
in societies around the world. In the UK, a campaign was in full swing to push the 
Military Wives Choir music single “Wherever You Are” to the Christmas Number 1 
spot, to highlight the public profile of British soldiers on active duty in the Afghanistan 
War, and to raise the morale of the wives and families they left behind.4 This campaign, 
472
O. GALLAGHERcombined with my nostalgia for Band Aid’s past Number 1 single, “Do They Know It’s 
Christmas?” inspired me to create a remix in the form of a music video. Coincidentally, 
the latest version of Band Aid’s song had just been recorded and released by the cast of 
the popular musical TV series, Glee.5
Band Aid and Live Aid
The original Band Aid single was released in the UK in 1984, followed by new versions 
featuring different recording artists in 1989, 2004, and 2011.6 The idea of Band Aid was 
to raise money for Africa—specifically, Ethiopia—where millions of people were dying 
of starvation at the time.7 It preceded the infamous UK and USA Live Aid concerts in 
1985 and was the brainchild of Bob Geldof, front man of the Dublin band, The 
Boomtown Rats, and Midge Ure, Scottish front man of Ultravox. In the US, inspired 
by the success of the Band Aid charity single, Michael Jackson, Lionel Richie, and 
Quincy Jones formed a similar supergroup of American musical stars called USA for 
Africa and released their own charity single, “We Are the World” in 1985, which sold 
over 20 million copies.8
In 1986, Chumbawamba, a UK band, released their album, Pictures of Starving Children 
Sell Records , offering an anticapitalist critique of both Band Aid and Live Aid, suggesting 
that they were cosmetic spectacles that served to draw attention away from the real 
political and economic causes of world hunger.9 The idea that world hunger could be 
eradicated by purchasing a predictable, self-congratulatory pop song seemed to arouse 
the suspicions of some who were familiar with the inner workings of the music business. 
Today, hunger and malnutrition are still significant problems in Africa, although not on 
the same scale as in the 1980s. In comparison to the rest of the world, Ethiopia still has 
some of the worst food insecurity, starvation, hunger, malnutrition, and infant mortality 
problems on the planet.10 There have been a number of scathing reports in relation to 
the spending of the Band Aid and Live Aid finances, such as claims that some of the 
money was used to purchase weapons for militia forces.11 Despite this, the charities have 
clearly done some good for the people of Ethiopia, but arguably Band Aid and USA for 
Africa have done a lot more for the careers, wealth, and fame of those artists whose 
names were associated with the records and concerts. In addition, the music videos for 
the various versions of “Do They Know It’s Christmas?” which depict the joy and cama -
raderie of familiar pop and rock icons singing in harmony, offer a striking visual coun -
terpoint to the scenes of violent protest in the Middle East and peaceful occupation in 
the USA with which they are juxtaposed in the remix video.
Political and Aesthetic Intentions
In producing this remix,12 I was responding to issues of power and resistance in developing  
and developed countries. Many developing countries had experienced protests against 
dictatorial regimes in the name of democracy, while in the USA and Europe protests 
against the corruption and transformation of liberal democracy into corporatism were 
on the increase. The original question that was asked by Geldof and Ure when they 
penned the lyrics, “Do they know it’s Christmas time?” referred to starving children in 
Ethiopia. Thirty years later, in my remix, these lyrics are redirected towards revolution -
aries, rebels, and freedom fighters struggling under dictatorial Middle Eastern regimes. 
This semiotic transferal of meaning occurs as a result of replacing imagery of starving 
473
OCCUPY/BAND AID MASHUPAfrican children from the original videos, with footage of clashes between protesters and 
military forces, begging the question, what does Christmas mean for these people? What 
does it mean for Occupy protesters who spent Christmas huddled on city streets across 
America? Although the intention of the remix is to highlight Arab Spring protests 
across many Middle Eastern countries, the majority of footage used focuses on Libya, 
echoing the connection with Africa evident in the original song.
The remix opens with a four-way split screen depicting images of Occupy sites,  
introducing the anticapitalist sentiments of US protesters involved in the movement 
(Figure 36.1 ). Within a few seconds, as the vocals begin, the viewer sees four different 
versions of “Do They Know It’s Christmas?”—the original 1984 version, the subsequent 
1989 and 2004 versions and finally the version recorded for the TV series Glee in 2011. 
From a musical perspective, the songs were recorded in different keys at different tem -
pos, so they do not synchronize. However, the Glee version was recorded at a harmonic 
interval of the original key used in 1984 (C major), meaning that the Glee vocal line 
became a relative harmony (F major) of the original, producing a haunting, atmos -
pheric, evocative effect, prior to the moment when Phil Collins’s heavy drum beat kicks 
in after the first verse. As the song progresses, at various points, different versions of the 
audio tracks fade in and out, to match the visuals, and to produce the most aurally pleas -
ing harmonies possible within the limitations of the available material. For example, U2 
front man, Bono sings the same line “Tonight, thank God it’s them instead of you” dif -
ferently in the 1984 and 2004 versions, both of which are depicted on screen simultane -
ously, creating a bizarre audiovisual mashup of time and space over two decades. In one 
version, the singer is seen as a young man early in his musical career and in the other, a 
middle-aged rock veteran.
Each of the source material music videos depicts crowds of musicians and singers 
standing side-by-side in recording studios performing the song. This relatively superficial 
Figure 36.1   Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , Owen Gallagher, 2011, via YouTube (courtesy of 
Owen Gallagher)
474
O. GALLAGHERvisual solidarity is contrasted with images of protesters standing side-by-side as they 
occupy public spaces or defend themselves against military attacks. For the first two 
minutes, three out of the four screens depict pop stars, while the fourth shows Occupy 
or Arab Spring protesters. The screens go through a gradual transformation, whereby 
pop stars and protesters compete for space, until two of the four screens show protesters 
and the remainder, pop stars; then three and eventually all four screens are taken over 
by protesters, as the song comes to an aural climax during the bridge. During the last 
section of the remix, images depict increasingly jubilant crowds and successful protests, 
ending with a placard reading “Nice day for a revolution.”
Influences
Musically, this work is influenced by the mashup genre, as exemplified by the work of 
one of my favorite artists, DJ Le Clown,13 who juxtaposes popular songs from different 
musical genres, recombining them in creative ways with often unusual and memorable 
results. In the case of Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , the techniques of production are similar, 
but the difference is that the same song is being mashed together with itself, albeit using 
different versions recorded by various artists over a period of almost 30 years. Visually, 
this work is inspired by the work of Nam June Paik, particularly his pieces that explore 
the potential of multiple screens within a larger frame, such as Electronic Superhighway ,14 
one of his many “video wall” projects ( Figure 36.2 ). It is also influenced by the video art 
work of Emergency Broadcast Network (EBN), which often employs the technique of 
“picture-in-picture,” as exemplified in their piece Electronic Behavior Control System .15 
More recently, these techniques have been advanced somewhat by the use of software 
such as Adobe After Effects, and the work of Joe Sabia makes particularly good use of 
technology to bring this technique to the next level, as demonstrated in Prime Time 
Terror: How TV Dramas Depict the War On Terror .16 Kutiman’s remixing of YouTube 
videos in his Thru-You project was also a strong influence on this work.17 Lev Manovich 
has written extensively about this phenomenon, the technique of viewing multiple 
images in one frame, which he has termed “spatial montage,” whereby elements are no 
longer necessarily replaced on the screen over time—instead, they coexist in the same 
space for longer periods.18
As part of my research, which involves the analysis of critical remix videos (CRVs) 
from semiotic, rhetorical, and ideological perspectives, I frequently use Manovich’s 
notion of spatial collage to enable the presentation of multiple sections of a particular 
remix on screen simultaneously. For example, when analyzing Vote Different,19 a 60-sec -
ond remix video based on Apple’s famous 1984 commercial, by dividing the video into 
individual shots, then looping and repositioning these shots into a single frame using 
Adobe After Effects, it becomes possible to view the entire remix video at once. This 
enables the potential for multiple research opportunities, such as the ability to make 
instant visual connections between shots that may otherwise go unnoticed. This tech -
nique was expanded in the creation of the Critical Remix Video Wall,20 an ongoing 
media art project, which presents multiple categories of CRVs on screen at once, ena -
bling each one to be selected and viewed, down to the level of the individual shot 
(Figure 36.3 ). These shots can then be recombined in new sequences, or combined with 
shots from other CRVs to produce entirely new compositions using remixed samples as 
raw material.
475
OCCUPY/BAND AID MASHUPRemix Practice
Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  was produced as part of a series of three remixes, all produced 
and published in December 2011 as part of my ongoing research, each of which 
explored a different political issue. The other two remixes were State of the Nation: 
Enda Kenny Recut ,21 and Man of the Year 2012: How Jon Stewart Became President .22 
The first of these took the form of a speech delivered by the Taoiseach (Prime 
Minister) of Ireland, Enda Kenny, in which the dialog was reedited to reflect a more 
truthful, if somewhat bizarre version of contemporary Ireland than had originally been 
broadcast. The second remix portrays a fictional narrative in which Obama’s 2012 
reelection campaign is taken over by comedians, Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert, 
who compete against him for the office of president, including a national televised 
debate, which ultimately leads to Stewart’s illegitimate election. All three remix vid -
eos are connected by their focus on serious global political issues mixed with a playful 
sense of irreverence, and their reuse and transformation of previously published mate -
rial to produce new works with different meanings. Each of these works is a type of 
remix video, however they adopt very different forms—a music mashup, a video recut, 
and a transformative narrative remix—the distinguishing feature being their reuse of 
sampled material.
Figure 36.2   Electronic Superhighway , Nam June Paik, 1995 (photo courtesy of user Libjbr 
on Wikimedia Commons)
476
O. GALLAGHERSince being uploaded to YouTube and Vimeo, Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  has been 
reposted to a number of blogs and webpages, including the largest Live Aid group on 
Facebook, and I have received a number of comments and emails in support of the work. 
Although this piece has not gone viral, with just over 8,000 views on YouTube,23 it has 
become part of a meme cluster featuring remixes, covers and variations of the song “Do 
They Know It’s Christmas?” and frequently appears in related content lists and targeted 
search results. In July 2013, it was displayed in the White Cube exhibition as part of the 
Repeat, Remix, Remediate summer school, which took place in Hamburg, Germany.24 
Surprisingly, this remix video has not received any takedown notices from copyright 
holders, even though the song and video content are still clearly recognizable, albeit 
significantly modified and remixed. One of my most recent remix videos, Miley/O’Connor 
Mashup: Nothing Compares to a Wrecking Ball ,25 has been blocked in some countries as a 
result of a copyright claim made by Sony Music Entertainment. This has been a problem 
for me and many other remixers in the past, however it is possible to successfully dispute 
such a claim by filing a counternotification, if the work in question has a strong case for 
fair use. I have personally overturned a number of takedown notices in this way during 
the past seven years and had my remix videos reinstated in each case.26
Figure 36.3   Critical Remix Video Wall , Owen Gallagher, 2014–, via criticalremix.com 
(courtesy of Owen Gallagher)
477
OCCUPY/BAND AID MASHUPConclusion
My hope for Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  is that it might become even a fraction as enduring  
as the song that inspired it. Thus far, the potential seems to exist. Every Christmas since 
it was uploaded, I have received fresh comments and emails from people who have just 
discovered the remix for the first time. The specific protests depicted in the video will 
surely age with time, however the broader issues to which they draw attention are 
unlikely to be resolved in the near future. As such, my hope is that this remix video will 
help to raise awareness of these issues, encouraging people to ask questions and perhaps 
contribute in some small way to ongoing global struggles against injustice.
Notes
 1 Ethan Bronner, “Bahrain Tears Down Monument as Protesters Seethe,” The New York Times , March 18, 
2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/19/world/middleeast/19bahrain.html?_r=0.
 2 The New York Times , “Arab World Uprisings: A Country-by-Country Look,” The New York Times , last 
updated December 12, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/world/middleeast/middle-east-hub.
html.
 3 Dominique Debucquoy Dodley and Jesse Solomon, “50 Arrested in Occupy Wall Street Demonstration,” 
CNN , December 18, 2011, http://edition.cnn.com/2011/12/17/us/new-york-occupy-arrests/.
 4 BBC News , “Military Wives Choir Captures Christmas Number One,” BBC , December 25, 2011, http://
www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-16285101.
 5 The Telegraph , “Glee to cover Band Aid’s Do They Know It’s Christmas,” The Telegraph , December 12, 
2011, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/music-news/8950294/Glee-to-cover-Band-Aids-Do-
They-Know-Its-Christmas.html.
 6 Kyle Anderson, “Looking Back at Live Aid: 25 Years Later,” MTV .com , July 12, 2010, http://www.mtv.
com/news/articles/1643506/looking-back-at-live-aid-25-years-later.jhtml.
 7 Kate Milner, “Flashback 1984: Portrait of a Famine,” BBC News , April 6, 2000, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/africa/703958.stm.
 8 David Breskin, We are the World: The Story Behind the Song  (Hollywood, CA: Image Entertainment, 
2004).
 9 Fraser McAlpine, “A Few Thoughts About Chumbawamba,” BBC America , July 10, 2012, http://www.
bbcamerica.com/anglophenia/2012/07/a-few-thoughts-about-chumbawamba/.
10 Roger Thurow, “Ethiopia’s Lasting Legacy of Famine,” The Telegraph , May 27, 2013, http://www.telegraph.
co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/ethiopia/10083186/Ethiopias-lasting-legacy-of-famine.
html.
11 Emma Alberici, “Live Aid Funded Ethiopian Rebels,” ABC News , November 17, 2010, http://www.abc.
net.au/news/2010-03-04/live-aid-funded-ethiopian-rebels/349434.
12 Owen Gallagher, Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , YouTube.com, December 23, 2011, YouTube video, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ImjjCSpgh0.
13 Philippe Maujard, “DJ Le Clown Profile Page,” SoundCloud.com , https://soundcloud.com/dj-le-clown.
14 Nam June Paik, “Electronic Superhighway,” American Art Museum, 1995–96, http://commons.wikime -
dia.org/wiki/File:Electronic_Superhighway_by_Nam_June_Paik.jpg (accessed May 16, 2014).
15 Emergency Broadcast Network, “Electronic Behavior Control System,” YouTube.com, August 20, 2012 
(1995), YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQZsKWV4mDo.
16 USC Annenberg, Primetime Terror: How TV Dramas Depict the War on Terror , YouTube.com, September 
6, 2011, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8XIUcJ9ymrs.
17 Kutiman, “Thru-You—01—Mother of All Funk Chords,” YouTube.com, March 7, 2009, YouTube video, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tprMEs-zfQA.
18 Lev Manovich, “The Archaeology of Windows and Spatial Montage,” Manovich.net , September 1, 2002, 
formerly available at: http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/windows_montage.doc.
19 Philip DeVelis, Vote Different , YouTube.com, March 5, 2007, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=6h3G-lMZxjo.
20 Owen Gallagher, “Critical Remix Video Wall,” criticalremix.com , 2014 and ongoing, http://criticalremix.
com/videowall.
478
O. GALLAGHER21 Owen Gallagher, State of the Nation—Enda Kenny Recut , YouTube.com, December 24, 2011, YouTube 
video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_SJGSDvNVY.
22 Owen Gallagher, Man of the Year 2012: How Jon Stewart Became President , YouTube.com, December 19, 
2011, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOuu1b81ogU.
23 Gallagher, Occupy/Band Aid Mashup .
24 University of Hamburg, “Repeat, Remix Remediate Summer School,” Research Center of Media and 
Communication, July 29–August 2, 2013, http://repeat-remix-remediate.com/ (accessed May 16, 2014).
25 Owen Gallagher, Miley/O’Connor Mashup—Nothing Compares to a Wrecking Ball , YouTube.com, October 
3, 2013, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44VjE5WcgjA.
26 I have received and successfully responded to takedown notices from BBC Worldwide, Paramount 
Pictures and 20th Century Fox for my remix videos, “Bertie Ahern on Dragons’ Den,” “Napoleon 
Dynamite PSA,” and “Shrek Recut,” among others.
Bibliography
Alberici, Emma. “Live Aid Funded Ethiopian Rebels.” ABC News , November 17, 2010. http://www.
abc.net.au/news/2010-03-04/live-aid-funded-ethiopian-rebels/349434 (accessed May 16, 2014).
Anderson, Kyle. “Looking Back at Live Aid: 25 Years Later.” MTV .com , July 12, 2010. http://www.mtv.
com/news/articles/1643506/looking-back-at-live-aid-25-years-later.jhtml (accessed May 16, 2014).
BBC News . “Military Wives Choir Captures Christmas Number One.” BBC , December 25, 2011. 
http://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-16285101 (accessed May 16, 2014).
Breskin, David. We are the World: The Story Behind the Song . Hollywood, CA: Image Entertainment, 2004.
Bronner, Ethan. “Bahrain Tears Down Monument as Protesters Seethe.” The New York Times , March 
18, 2011. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/19/world/middleeast/19bahrain.html?_r=0 (accessed 
May 16, 2014).
DeVelis, Philip. Vote Different . YouTube.com, March 5, 2007. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=6h3G-lMZxjo (accessed May 16, 2014).
Dodley, Dominique Debucquoy, and Jesse Solomon. “50 Arrested in Occupy Wall Street 
Demonstration.” CNN , December 18, 2011. http://edition.cnn.com/2011/12/17/us/new-york-
occupy-arrests/ (accessed May 16, 2014).
Emergency Broadcast Network. Electronic Behavior Control System . YouTube.com, August 20. 2012 
(1995). YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQZsKWV4mDo (accessed May 16, 
2014).
Gallagher, Owen. Man of the Year 2012: How Jon Stewart Became President . YouTube.com, December 19, 
2011. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kOuu1b81ogU (accessed May 16, 2014).
——. Occupy/Band Aid Mashup , YouTube.com, December 23, 2011. YouTube video. http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=-ImjjCSpgh0 (accessed May 16, 2014).
——. State of the Nation—Enda Kenny Recut . YouTube.com, December 24, 2011. YouTube video. http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_SJGSDvNVY (accessed May 16, 2014).
——. Miley/O’Connor Mashup—Nothing Compares to a Wrecking Ball . YouTube.com, October 3, 2013. 
YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44VjE5WcgjA (accessed May 16, 2014).
——. “Critical Remix Video Wall.” criticalremix.com , 2014 and ongoing. http://criticalremix.com/
videowall (accessed May 16, 2014).
Kutiman. Thru-You—01—Mother of All Funk Chords . YouTube.com, March 7, 2009. http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=tprMEs-zfQA (accessed May 16, 2014).
Manovich, Lev. “The Archaeology of Windows and Spatial Montage.”  Manovich.net , 2002. formerly 
available at: http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/windows_montage.doc (accessed March 2014).
Maujard, Philippe “DJ Le Clown Profile Page,” SoundCloud.com , https://soundcloud.com/dj-le-clown 
(accessed May 16, 2014).
McAlpine, Fraser. “A Few Thoughts About Chumbawamba.” BBC America , July 10, 2012. http://www.
bbcamerica.com/anglophenia/2012/07/a-few-thoughts-about-chumbawamba/ (accessed May 16, 2014).
Milner, Kate. “Flashback 1984: Portrait of a Famine,” BBC News , April 6, 2000. http://news.bbc.
co.uk/2/hi/africa/703958.stm (accessed May 16, 2014).
479
OCCUPY/BAND AID MASHUPPaik, Nam June. “Internet Dream.” ZKM , Centre for Art and Media, 1994. http://www02.zkm.de/
digitalartconservation/index.php/en/exhibitions/zkm-exhibition/nnnnnnam-june-paik.html 
(accessed May 16, 2014).
The New York Times . “Arab World Uprisings: A Country-by-Country Look.” The New York Times , last 
updated December 12, 2011. http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/world/middleeast/middle-east-
hub.html (accessed May 16, 2014).
The Telegraph . “Glee to cover Band Aid’s Do They Know It’s Christmas.” The Telegraph , December 12, 
2011. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/music-news/8950294/Glee-to-cover-Band-Aids-
Do-They-Know-Its-Christmas.html (accessed May 16, 2014).
Thurow, Roger. “Ethiopia’s Lasting Legacy of Famine.” The Telegraph , May 27, 2013. http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/ethiopia/10083186/Ethiopias-lasting-
legacy-of-famine.html (accessed May 16 2014).
USC Annenberg. Primetime Terror: How TV Dramas Depict the War on Terror . YouTube.com, September 
6, 2011. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8XIUcJ9ymrs (accessed May 16, 2014).
48037
REMIXING THE REMIX
Elisa Kreisinger
I came to video remixing at the height of the “Web 2.0” era, and this surge of online 
participation was most noticeable to me in feminist and queer online communities 
where users were quick to publish smart and snarky responses to popular culture. It was 
2008, before the movie Bridesmaids  and the award-winning HBO series GIRLS , and as 
indicated by the popularity of these shows, young women were tired of compromising 
their gender politics to be entertained. While there is a long academic tradition support -
ing the criticism of popular culture, women with only an Intro to Gender Studies semi -
nar under their belts were suddenly negotiating the fine line between fan and critic 
publicly, in real time through GIFs, blogs and vlogs. These viewers were no longer pas -
sive victims of the media, they were creators of it, able to talk back and generate content 
that commented on the misrepresentation or marginalization of their communities. 
Platforms like Tumblr and Jezebel were one year old and they were hungry for content. 
It was the perfect climate for feminist video remixing: there was an already-engaged 
audience that pop culture seemed to repeatedly misrepresent, and multiple platforms to 
disseminate work. But, of course, it was not so simple.
Hosting platforms such as YouTube were struggling to curb piracy and keep copyright 
holders happy. Unfortunately, remixers got caught in the middle. In June 2007, YouTube 
began trial-testing their automated detection system, known as Content ID1, to help the 
entertainment industry identify uploaded videos that infringed their copyright. By 2011, 
Content ID was wrongfully flagging remix content for potential copyright violations as 
it still cannot identify a fair use of copyright content over an infringing one. Users found 
the dispute process to be an intimidating and arduous process, often taking weeks to 
resolve, highlighting how private agreements between copyright holders and hosting 
platforms undermine the safeguards for fair use built into the law and leave remixers 
confused about their rights, with no choice but to abide by the interests of the copyright 
holder.
But before I address the conflicts embedded in remix practice, I want to define it and 
highlight its position as an artistic practice heavily influenced by a postmodern 
framework.
Video Remix and a Postmodern Framework
Video remix is a DIY form of grassroots media production whereby creators appropriate 
mass media texts, reediting them to comment, critique, satirize, or pay homage to the 
source material and produce a newly transformed piece of media intended for public 
viewing on video-sharing sites such as YouTube. Because remix requires the physical 
481
REMIXING THE REMIXdeconstruction of mainstream images of identity similar to the deconstruction of identi -
ties associated with a postmodern framework, it easily serves as an effective tool for 
questioning socially constructed images of gender and, I would like to argue, is itself a 
queer act.
In “Bodily Inscriptions, Performative Subversions,”2 Judith Butler argues that station -
ary racial, gendered, and sexual identities are harmful, used to justify power over another 
and foster a binary. Deconstructing these identities, Butler argues, reveals the arbitrary 
characteristics and rigid categorization on which oppression is based, thus destabilizing 
systems of oppression. Building off of this theory, the physical deconstruction and recon -
textualization of popular culture’s depictions of gender, race, and sexuality that remix 
requires, allows creators to produce multiple and fluid concepts of identity, disrupting 
the binaries on which oppression and hierarchy are based.
Additionally, the remix process itself can be considered a queer act. If queer is defined 
as any act that challenges, questions, or provokes the normal, the acceptable, and the 
dominant, then remix’s required rejection of the dominant and acceptable notions of 
copyright challenges the author/reader and owner/user binaries on which it is based.
Putting Theory into Practice
My goal in 2008 was to create a digital product heavily influenced by Butler’s writings 
that would capture the existing level of critical discourse around women in the media 
already happening on blogs and Tumblr in video form. I hoped that by physically decon -
structing female characters in mainstream TV shows and reediting them into subversive, 
feminist ones, I could rearticulate and recontextualize normative identities in a recog -
nizable narrative structure so that both the remix form and the pop-culture content 
mirrored each other’s purpose: to redefine the way we are represented.
To start, I sought out the most highly gendered source material targeted at women. 
The source material had to have characters immediately identifiable by women, even if 
they had no knowledge of the storyline. The right show had to carry enough weight in 
our collective cultural consciousness to be recognizable by nonfans so that viewers could 
identify that it was taken out of context and was now a new, transformed narrative. That 
show was Sex and the City (SATC) ; it was a groundbreaking and innovative female-
driven pop-culture text that was as subversive as it was problematic. SATC  championed 
staying single under societal pressure, it was sexually frank and the story was told from 
a woman’s point of view, seemingly in her own voice. But it appropriated the language 
of radical feminism only to retell old patriarchal fairy tales.
Carrie:
No, it’s not about the money. I don’t care about the money.
I’m talking about a woman’s right to shoes.
Why did she have to shame me?
Miranda:
Because she’s trapped in a hell of her own making.
No wait, that’s me. Oh.3
Why were these women, in all their sexual candor and frankness, abandoning their 
postfeminist thinking? Or, why was it so easy to use the language of radical feminism to 
tell the story but so hard to give up on those patriarchal fantasies within the narrative?
482
E. KREISINGERThese contradictions made for infinite reworkings of storylines. From a production 
standpoint, there were enough cutaways, B-roll and uninterrupted dialog-driven scenes 
per season of footage to reedit into a three-part narrative narrated by the main character, 
which I titled The Queer Carrie Project  (Figure 37.1 ). I built a script database from fan-
made transcripts found online and took apart each season of the show, assembling a new 
narrative that follows Carrie Bradshaw out of the closet, confronting those patriarchal 
fantasies head on, ultimately rejecting the candy-coated ending of the original and opt -
ing for a more tragic turn of events.
Because popular culture is such a re flection of our own societal norms, when we fail 
to see ourselves and our communities represented our sense of identity disintegrates 
within that community. It is not my intention to queer every cast of women who have 
strong friendships on TV . However, when a community is culturally “poor” in terms of 
representation, both queer and feminist, one must reuse what they have access to, 
whether it be for subtext, entertainment, or critique.
One of the problems with The Queer Carrie Project  was that the show was ten years old. 
While still discussed across blogs thanks to the movie Sex and the City released in 2008 (fol -
lowed by Sex and the City 2  in 2010 and the TV series The Carrie Diaries in 2013), the source 
footage was standard definition, the aspect ratio was 4×3 and the fashion was passé. The 
dated source material significantly limited viewership. If my goal was to rearticulate and 
recontextualize normative identities in a recognizable narrative form, I had to find identities 
that were more current, with source material airing weekly and discussed, reviewed, and 
recapped in public discursive spaces to attract maximum viewership and conversation.
In 2010, there had been four seasons of the hour-long AMC series Mad Men when 
lengthy license fee talks between AMC and Lionsgate pushed the fifth season’s air date 
to 2012. The situation provided enough footage and time for a new remix series to be 
made in anticipation of the long-awaited premiere.
Figure 37.1   The Queer Carrie Project , Elisa Kreisinger, 2008 (courtesy of Elisa Kreisinger)
483
REMIXING THE REMIXDon Loves Roger mashes up every season of Mad Men , creating a remixed narrative 
about two men who once preserved established notions of manhood and masculinity 
but then found relief and happiness in each other, becoming a threat to the very same 
patriarchal system on which their power and privilege was based ( Figure 37.2 ). Don 
Loves Roger gives Don an opportunity to subvert rather than sell traditional 
masculinity.
In Mad Men: Set Me Free , Betty, Joan, and Peggy form an entirely female-framed ver -
sion of  Mad Men  that rearticulates their feminist frustrations amidst rigid gender roles, 
with the help of the 1966 Motown hit “Keep Me Hanging On.”
Both Mad Men  remixes garnered more views than the official AMC Mad Men  trailers;  
however, the videos were disabled by YouTube via the copyright holders, Lionsgate, 
for wrongful copyright infringement (but they remained on Vimeo) ( Figure 37.3 ). It 
is important to stress that the claim of infringement was wrongful, as it points to the 
disturbing ability for YouTube to pick and choose who is allowed to exercise their fair 
use rights. The Web’s transformative remix works are highly eligible to be protected 
under fair use, a section of US copyright law that allows for copyrighted content to be 
sampled and quoted without the permission of the copyright holder for the trans -
formative purposes of comment, critique, satire, or homage.4 Fair use provides a safe -
guard against private censorship by copyright, allowing creators to build upon old 
culture to create new. However, YouTube’s Content ID system, which automatically 
scans 100 hours of user-uploaded-video every minute for copyright violations,5 is una -
ble to distinguish between a fair use of copyrighted content and an unlawful one.6 As 
a result, the automated system regularly removes, blocks, and monetizes user-generated 
content on the basis of copyright infringement, even though it may not be in viola -
tion. The fear of unlawful removal of content due to an inaccurate claim of copyright 
infringement has chilling effects that illustrate the disconnect between copy culture 
and copyright.
Figure 37.2  Don Loves Roger , Elisa Kreisinger, 2012 (courtesy of Elisa Kreisinger)
484
E. KREISINGERConflicts Embedded in the Genre
This was the first conflict I encountered upon entering the world of content creation as 
an appropriation artist in the YouTube era. It became illustrative of the dichotomies 
embedded in the genre. While we live in a brave new world of participatory media where 
the barriers to entry are so low that nearly anyone can make a viral video, in reality, 
uploaded content is likely to be matched for copyright violation, regardless of whether 
or not it is a remix or “original” content. The most telling example of the flaws embed -
ded in YouTube’s automated system occurred in a 2012 video Simple Living: Picking a Wild 
Salad  where the user Simple Living documented himself picking eatable wild greens in 
a field. Content ID matched the bird chirping sounds in the background upon upload. 
As he stated in the information section below his video,
Basically, their system identified this video as containing copyright infringing 
music owned by Rumblefish. They put ads on it, with the proceeds of the ads 
going partly to Rumblefish, partly to Google.
Since there’s no music in my video, I disputed the claimed copyright violation, 
and Rumblefish was sent a link to my video to check it and see if Youtube’s [ sic] 
automated system had made a mistake.
They checked the video, and told Youtube [ sic] that there was no mistake, and 
that they do own the music in the video. So the dispute was closed, and there was 
seemingly nothing else I could do.7
So while we live in a participatory culture where everything is a remix, the reality of 
content creation is that YouTube users are so often presumed guilty of copyright viola -
tion upon upload that they have given up defending their work. In a 2013 nationwide 
survey of content creators I conducted as an artist-in-residence at Eyebeam Art and 
Figure 37.3  Mad Men: Set Me Free , Elisa Kreisinger, 2012 (courtesy of Elisa Kreisinger)
485
REMIXING THE REMIXTechnology Center in collaboration with DC-based consumer rights organization Public 
Knowledge, I found that the majority of respondents did not attempt to dispute a copy -
right violation because the process was too confusing or time consuming8. In fact, 
Content ID places the fate of the video in question in the hands of the copyright holder. 
As Reclaiming Fair Use author and attorney Peter Jaszi notes in the Center for Media & 
Social Impact’s video Fair Use is Your Friend—Remix Culture , “fair use is a right, as the 
Supreme Court has recognized, and it’s rooted in the First Amendment. But like any 
right, its reality depends on its exercise. We must use it or risk losing it.”9
The flaws of Content ID threaten fair use’s effectiveness as an important legal exemp -
tion to copyright, leaving fair users confused about their rights with little choice but to 
abide by the interests of the copyright holder. Private agreements between copyright 
holders and hosting platforms such as Content ID undermine the safeguards for fair use 
built into the law. But the question remains: What kind of obligation does a private 
company built on fair use (Google image search, Google books, etc.) have to its users to 
allow them the same ability to easily access and defend their rights?
Conclusion
Remix practice itself can be considered a queer act as it demands that producers  
physically deconstruct copyright images, identities, and narratives to create a new, trans -
formative work, displacing and, thus, queering, the binaries on which copyright, owner -
ship, and authorship are based. This physical deconstruction of mainstream images of 
identity that remix requires is similar to the deconstruction of identities associated with 
a postmodern framework, making remix serve as an effective tool for questioning socially 
constructed images of gender. The Queer Carrie Project , Don Loves Roger , and Mad Men 
Set Me Free  were inspired by Butler’s writings and the robust critical discourse surround -
ing gender depictions in the media throughout the Web. Through these videos, I hoped 
I could rearticulate and recontextualize normative identities in a recognizable narrative 
to redefine the way we are represented. However the challenges of doing so highlight 
the conflicts embedded in the genre. Private agreements between copyright holders and 
hosting platforms such as YouTube’s automated Content ID system make it difficult for 
all users, especially remixers who depend on the fair use of copyright content, to upload 
and share their work. Such challenges simultaneously undermine the safeguards for fair 
use built into the law. One of the wonderful by-products of video remix is that its recon -
textualization of images forces viewers to reflect upon popular culture’s role in society. 
With nearly one out of every two people on the Internet visiting YouTube and a monthly 
audience equivalent to ten Super Bowl audiences,10 it is troublesome that such impor -
tant work cannot be sustained in this space.
Notes
 1 Kevin J. Delaney, “YouTube to Test Software to Ease Licensing Fights,” The Wall Street Journal . Last 
modified June 12, 2007. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB118161295626932114.
 2 Judith Butler, “Bodily Inscriptions, Performative Subversion,” Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion 
of Identity  (New York, NY: Routledge, 2011), 175–193.
 3 “Season 6, Episode 9.” Sex and the City . 2003. New York: HBO.
 4 Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, “Code of best practices in fair use for online video,” Center for 
Media and Social Impact, June 2008, http://www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/online_best_practices_
in_fair_use.pdf.
486
E. KREISINGER 5 YouTube, “Statistics,” YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.
 6 Shenaz Zack, “Official Blog: Content ID and Fair Use,” YouTube Official Blog, last modified April 22, 
2010, YouTube video, http://youtube-global.blogspot.com/2010/04/content-id-and-fair-use.html.
 7 Simple Living. “Simple Living: Picking a Wild Salad.” YouTube, February 24, 2012, YouTube video, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPBlfeuZuWg.
 8 Elisa Kreisinger, “Fair Use(r) Survey Results,” Pop Culture Pirate, last modified December 2, 2013, for -
merly available at: http://www.popculturepirate.com/fair-user-survey-results/.
 9 Center for Media & Social Impact, “Fair Use: Fair Use Is Your Friend—Remix Culture,” YouTube, May 
2, 2013, YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alKh7IMEAoE#t=88.
10 The YouTube Team. “Official Blog: YouTube Hits a Billion Monthly Users.” YouTube Official Blog, last 
modified March 20, 2013, http://youtube-global.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/onebillionstrong.html.
Bibliography
Aufderheide , Patricia, and Peter Jaszi. “Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Online Video.” Center 
for Media and Social Impact,  June 2008. http://www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/online_best_
practices_in_fair_use.pdf (accessed August 20, 2014).
Butler, Judith. “Bodily Inscriptions, Performative Subversion.” Gender Trouble: Feminism and the 
Subversion of Identity , 175–193. New York: Routledge, 2011.
Center for Media & Social Impact . “Fair Use: Fair Use is Your Friend—Remix Culture.” YouTube, May 
2, 2013. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alKh7IMEAoE#t=88  (accessed January 
3, 2014) .
Delaney, Kevin J. “YouTube to Test Software to Ease Licensing Fights.” The Wall Street Journal . Last 
modified June 12, 2007. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB118161295626932114 (accessed 
August 20, 2014).
“Season 6, Episode 9.” Sex and the City . 2003. New York: HBO.
Jenkins, Henry. “Locating Fair Use in the Space Between Fandom and the Art World ( Part One ).” 
Confessions of an AcaFan. http://henryjenkins.org/2009/03/locating_fair_use_in_the_space.html 
(accessed July 25, 2013).
Kreisinger, Elisa. “Fair Use(r) Survey Results.” Pop Culture Pirate. Last modified December 2, 2013. 
Formerly available at: http://www.popculturepirate.com/fair-user-survey-results/ (last accessed 
December 2, 2013).
Simple Living. “Simple Living: Picking a Wild Salad.” YouTube. February 24, 201 2. YouTube video. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPBlfeuZuWg  (accessed January 3, 2014) .
Smith, Roberta. “Rays of Light and Menacing Shadows.” The New York Times . http://www.nytimes.
com/2013/12/15/arts/design/roberta-smiths-2013-art-highlights-and-some-concerns.html?pagewanted = 
all&_r=0 (accessed December 14, 2013).
Steinhauer, Jillian. “Are Art Professionals Afraid of Fair Use?” Hyperallergic. http://hyperallergic.
com/106741/are-art-professionals-afraid-of-fair-use/ (accessed February 3, 2014).
The YouTube Team. “Official Blog: YouTube Hits a Billion Monthly Users.” YouTube Official Blog. 
Last modified March 20, 2013.  http://youtube-global.blogspot.co.uk/2013/03/onebillionstrong.html 
(accessed August 20, 2014).
YouTube. “Statistics.” http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html  (accessed January 5, 2014) .
Zack, Shenaz. “Official Blog: Content ID and Fair Use.” YouTube Official Blog. Last modified April 
22, 2010 . http://youtube-global.blogspot.com/2010/04/content-id-and-fair-use.html (accessed 
August 20, 2014).
48738
A FAIR(Y) USE TALE
Eric S. Faden
In early 2006, I began a collaborative film called A Fair(y) Use Tale  with several of my 
Bucknell University undergraduate students ( Figure 38.1 ). This short film remixed over 
400 unlicensed animated clips from the notoriously litigious Walt Disney Company. 
Their aggressive lobbying in favor of the Sonny Bono Copyright Extension Act of 1998 
put Disney in the middle of an intellectual property storm and we hoped our film might 
act as a lightning rod. During A Fair(y) Use Tale ’s production, we wanted to get a fresh 
opinion on the cut and showed an early version to a class of first-year students. About 
two minutes into the movie, a young woman in the front row was visibly uncomfortable 
while watching the film. Soon after, she urgently raised her hand and I paused the film. 
She asked, “Are we going to get into trouble for watching this?” At first, her question 
confused me but I quickly realized she was concerned that simply watching the film might 
qualify as criminal activity. This was the moment when I knew that today’s institution 
of copyright protection had become insane .
The next year, Stanford Law School posted A Fair(y) Use Tale online, The Media 
Education Foundation released the film on DVD, and shortly thereafter the film 
appeared on YouTube.1 To date, the film has received over 14 million views online and 
is regularly used as a pedagogical resource in high schools, colleges, law schools, and 
even featured on Google’s YouTube copyright education page. More impressively, my 
students and I continue to enjoy a life of freedom unencumbered by fines or jail time 
over copyright infringement. This essay details how and why we got away with it.
The Remix Mediascape in the Early Twenty-First Century
A Fair(y) Use Tale is a product of my frustration with the vagaries of copyright law and 
academic publishing in the age of electronic journals. In the late 1990s, I was a graduate 
student in Film Studies at The University of Florida. While writing my dissertation, I 
hit a roadblock trying to articulate various concepts, theories, and observations of pat -
terns I saw while analyzing films. For me, describing visual or sonic material through text 
proved dissatisfying—no matter how vivid the prose, the words never approximated the 
screen’s complexity, poetics, and nuances.
As a result, I began making short videos that illustrated my textual analysis using basic 
remixing of filmic texts ( Figure 38.2 ). Initially, these were purely analog affairs: Using a 
stack of VHS decks and a video mixer with text generator, I manipulated and annotated 
film clips by slowing or freezing the action and adding arrows and a small amount of text 
to indicate points of interest. In other cases, I put two (or more) clips side-by-side or 
used superimposition to illustrate common visual patterns ( Figure 38.3 ). Sometimes 
488
E. S. FADENstraight cuts produced the jarring juxtaposition or radical similarity between different 
films I wanted to illuminate. Even at this early stage, I saw how editing and annotation 
could make the films “speak” in a new way. Remix allowed the films to talk to each 
other—to comment, illuminate, critique—rather than standing stoically in historical 
and cultural isolation. The art of remix became a scholarly spotlight to expose material 
otherwise difficult to observe.
These fledgling video illustrations so successfully communicated my ideas that my 
dissertation director Robert Ray suggested I combine the films together as a companion 
piece to my dissertation—a kind of multimedia, alternate version of my textual, schol -
arly work. Adding original footage, voiceover, and music to the remixed clips created 
20–30 minute video essays. Problems, however, quickly arose.
These problems weren’t so much with the content in my videos but with their mode: 
The academy, in the large sense of the word, wasn’t prepared to receive video as a schol -
arly medium. In the late 1990s, doctoral dissertations were purely textual affairs. Thus, 
my videos could not be included as part of my finished dissertation. Further, this type of 
work did not fit into the standard hierarchy of academic publishing, which counts con -
ference papers, peer-reviewed journal articles, and books from established scholarly 
presses toward tenure and promotion. For example, proposing a video at a film studies 
conference in lieu of a traditional paper read aloud resulted in immediate rejection. 
Thus, I had to follow a “bait and switch” strategy where I proposed a paper and then 
Figure 38.1   Stills from the video A Fair(y) Use Tale , Eric S. Faden, 2006 (images 
courtesy of the artist)
489
A FAIR(Y) USE TALEsubstituted my video work during the actual presentation. Indeed, in a cruel irony, one 
of my first published journal articles was a transcription of an earlier video essay called 
Crowd Control .2
As print journals gave way to electronic journals in the early twenty-first century, 
another problem arose: copyright. Traditional print-based journals never dealt exten -
sively with appropriated material. Publishers had long established quotations from other 
texts as fair use. Images or film stills accompanying scholarly books or journal articles 
were often licensed at reasonable rates or treated as fair use and litigation was practically 
nonexistent. Yet, the move from print to electronic journals potentially opened a 
Pandora’s box of intellectual property concerns. After all, with the simultaneous rise of 
affordable computers that easily copied, combined, and transformed text, images, film, 
and music plus expanding access to the Internet’s potential for instantaneous worldwide 
distribution, many scholarly publishers and university legal departments were rightly 
concerned about copyright infringement. In short, the ability to create, appropriate, and 
remix media far outpaced the legal framework and “best practices” for distributing media. 
From a publisher’s legal viewpoint, the path of least resistance was simply to reject any 
work—no matter the quality—that might contain problematic content.
Indeed, my 2006 film The Documentary’s New Politics was initially caught in a copy -
right/fair use catch-22. The film used extensive amounts of remixed, unlicensed, appro -
priated footage to provide a scholarly analysis and critique of recent trends in feature 
Figure 38.2   Stills from the video Mass Ornament Revisited , Eric S. Faden, 1998 (images 
courtesy of the artist)
Figure 38.3   Stills from the video Crowd Control , Eric S. Faden, 1999 (Images courtesy 
of the artist)
491
A FAIR(Y) USE TALEdocumentaries. In each case, I used the footage under the auspices of fair use, carefully 
including unlicensed material only for the purposes of supporting a particular scholarly 
argument or illustrating an analytical point. The online journal where I submitted my 
film rejected it despite peer reviews that recommended publication. The journal editor 
told me they could publish the video after I licensed or cleared every appropriated clip. 
Because a court determination of fair use is not predictable, many scholarly journals and 
publishers rejected any responsibility of holding an intellectual property “hot potato,” 
should a content-owner decide to litigate.
A Fair(y) Use Tale
These difficulties with publishing and distribution led me to make a film specifically 
about copyright and fair use. While I did not have a clear concept in mind, I felt the film 
should educate and remind potential publishers (and the public at large) about the fair 
use clause of copyright law in the digital age. Moreover, I wanted “a worst case scenario” 
for fair use; something so dependent on fair use, that any future films that appropriated 
material would seem uncomplicated to publishers and distributors. As a general rubric, 
I make films that are about something while simultaneously demonstrating the thing, 
itself.
A small group of Bucknell undergraduate students—Craig Staufenberg, Saskia 
Madlener, Janine Merolla, Reanna Truck, and David Lopera—agreed to help. We spent 
considerable time developing ideas but nothing stuck. Then, Craig Staufenberg pro -
posed a film composed exclusively  of copyrighted material, using short clips of individual 
words mashed together to enunciate the dialog. We collaboratively wrote a script about 
copyright, boiling down the thick legal concepts into something short and 
straightforward.
As the script developed, we devised a screen test, a kind of proof of concept, that 
cobbled together two lines of dialog from an assortment of movies. It is safe to say that 
the initial screen test was an abysmal disaster. While we found individual words to fit 
our script, the cutting from black and white to color or from wide screen to full screen 
proved too distracting. Moreover, each film carried various amounts of vague historical 
or cultural “baggage”—narrative backstory and star personas that distracted from the 
content. Viewers invested more time mentally identifying each film fragment rather 
than listening to the newly remixed dialog. Finally, the soundtracks also proved chal -
lenging. Because narrative feature films evenly mix dialog with sound effects and music, 
individual words proved difficult to cleanly isolate. Even worse, contemporary films 
frequently employed overlapping dialog that made individual words incoherent out of 
context. There was, however, one genre that was less preventative: animated films.
In fact, animated movies had several advantages. First, the aesthetics provide a con -
sistent visual quality and also more consistent aspect ratios. Thus remixing different 
animated films wasn’t as visually jarring as live action films. Second, the films were 
largely iconic and familiar. As a result, viewers focused less on identifying individual 
films and more on the dialog’s message. Third, we discovered that dialog was much easier 
to isolate in animated films. Perhaps because the films were intended for a younger audi -
ence, dialog was clearly enunciated and mixed higher in the soundtrack.
Within minutes of these realizations, we knew The Walt Disney Company should 
supply our film’s dialog since they had a distinct reputation for zealously defending their 
intellectual property. If we could make an educational film that exclusively appropriated 
492
E. S. FADENmaterial from Walt Disney under the rubric of fair use, then we could appropriate any -
thing. Our film—by deliberately poking the biggest copyright bear with a sharp fair use 
stick—hoped to establish a small precedent for how technology, remix, and scholarship 
might push the law forward.
The Process and Aesthetics of Remix in A Fair(y) Use Tale
With a script finished, we started the laborious search for individual words of dialog from 
the Disney canon. We used three main strategies for finding dialog: crawling the Internet 
for film transcripts, watching the films with closed captioning, and relying on two stu -
dents—Janine Merolla and Reanna Truck—who simply had an encyclopedic knowledge 
of (and love for) all things Disney.3 We particularly looked for matching words that 
began or ended a sentence since those proved easier to sonically isolate and provided 
the most intelligibility. Once found, we captured the clips (via an analog capture pro -
cess) into a nonlinear editing workstation. Beyond dialog, we appropriated clips illus -
trating various legal concepts as well as various types of reaction shots.
At first glance, A Fair(y) Use Tale appears to be a mashup of different snippets of 
dialog strung together like a digital video ransom note. Yet, the film actually contains 
many different presentational modes (plus some original footage as well as licensed 
material).4 For the remix, we wanted to clearly have three distinct modes: material 
representing the audience’s viewpoint; expository material explaining legal concepts; 
and material commenting on, critiquing, or illustrating the expository material. For the 
audience’s viewpoint, the remixed material mainly focused on the posing of questions 
(“what the heck is the public domain?”) plus various (often silent) reaction shots of 
confusion, contemplation, or understanding. These reflective moments indicated how 
the audience might likely react to the expository material but also provided much 
needed visual and sonic relief from the rapid cutting. The expository material focused 
on describing the state, scope, and history of copyright law as accurately and objectively 
as possible. This goal proved to be a give and take between the script we wrote and the 
words we found. The script endured many revisions to help fit the available catalog of 
words supplied by the source films. Surprisingly, however, several Disney films ( Aladdin 
and Robin Hood , in particular) largely focus on legal concepts and were chock full of key 
terms.5 Finally, we remixed dialog that provided a reaction or commentary on the expos -
itory material. This material was more subjective and argumentative in nature—a literal 
critique of the law that advocated for change.
Another important aesthetic consideration of remix concerns the relationship 
between the nature of the source material and the nature of the remix—the larger the 
degree of repurposing, the bigger the remix’s critical impact. Disney markets their films 
exclusively as commercial entertainment. Given that the material is largely promoted 
to young children, audiences and popular media critics perceive their films as simple, 
harmless, and escapist in nature. Our remix’s sharp critical edge emerges from the repur -
posing of escapist entertainment into the noncommercial arena of education about a 
serious and complex topic.
Even A Fair(y) Use Tale ’s brusque form undermines, opposes, and transforms the original  
material’s style. After all, the original Disney canon remains immensely pleasurable, 
escapist, and entertaining. Their editing, animation, and sound design skillfully draw 
audiences into a seamless narrative universe that obscures any production labor. Our 
remixing, however, purposely ruins that pleasure by highlighting the editing and 
493
A FAIR(Y) USE TALEdenying the audience a familiar narrative. In fact, as A Fair(y) Use Tale ’s expository 
material explains, the film’s grating style results from the law itself—the fair use exemp -
tion dictates that only short excerpts may be used. We embraced that exemption by 
borrowing only small fractions (usually less than 1 percent) of the original source 
material.
Fair Use and Transformation
Remix’s transformative nature represents another important concept of fair use. Courts 
increasingly consider whether material is appropriated whole and untouched or whether 
the material was transformed to serve a new purpose. Obviously, the more transforma -
tive the remix, the more likely the usage will be deemed “fair.” For A Fair(y) Use Tale , 
we considered two particular acts of transformation. First, on a macro level, was the shift 
in the nature of the material as discussed above. The very act of editing and remixing 
the material changes its nature from entertainment to education. Moreover, we wanted 
the editing to be an obvious tour-de-force to show the labor, time, and energy invested 
in the film’s construction.
On a micro level, however, there were also significant changes to the source material. 
For example, the film’s first third significantly slows down the animation and dialog as 
a way of “acclimating” audiences to the remix. As viewers adjust to the staccato editing, 
we gradually sped up the cutting pace and source material. We digitally “massaged” 
nearly every clip in some way—scaled frames to highlight an individual character or 
gesture, sleight-of-hand speed changes, audio pitch shifting, mapping different dialog 
onto existing animation, and looping reaction shots. Thus, while the film’s overall 
“look” appears Disney-esque, the individual shots remain altered.
Fair Use as an Offensive Weapon
Above I outlined various ways that A Fair(y) Use Tale  employed the fair use exemp -
tion to avoid copyright infringement. Yet, the reality is, Disney very well could have 
litigated against us and that litigation would prove so expensive as to make it impos -
sible to defend in court. Many potential fair use cases never make it to trial as the cost 
of defending copyright infringement is prohibitively expensive. As a result, a kind of 
economic censorship exists where content owners quash potential fair use cases by 
monetarily draining those appropriating material prior to a court determining 
infringement.
During production, A Fair(y) Use Tale  received significant support and legal guidance 
from Stanford Law School’s Lawrence Lessig and Anthony Falzone as part of Stanford’s 
Center for Internet and Society. Attorney Falzone, in particular, advised us to embrace 
fair use as an offensive weapon rather than a defensive strategy. The film not only dem -
onstrates a thorough understanding of the legal concepts at play, it also highlights in the 
film’s credits that intellectual property attorneys stand ready for Disney to react. To para -
phrase Heath Ledger’s Joker character from The Dark Knight , A Fair(y) Use Tale wasn’t 
about making money, it was about sending a message. The film’s continued existence 
establishes an unofficial precedent for fair use in the digital age. My hope is that the film 
dissuades content owners from censoring critical commentary while also showing emerg -
ing filmmakers, artists, and scholars how to properly and creatively appropriate material 
for critical and artistic purposes.
494
E. S. FADENNotes
1 Stanford Law School, The Center for Internet and Society: http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2007/03/
fairy-use-tale. A Fair(y) Use Tale  is included on the DVD of Kembrew McLeod’s Freedom of Expression 
(Media Education Foundation, 2007, US): http://www.mediaed.org/cgi-bin/commerce.
cgi?preadd=action&key=127. The video can be found on YouTube at http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=CJn_jC4FNDo (all accessed August 20, 2014).
2 Eric S. Faden, “Crowd Control,” Journal of Film and Video  53, no. 2/3 (2001): 93–106.
3 Several commentators assumed we ripped the DVD closed captioning and then searched those text files 
for appropriate words. That would have been a really good idea but unfortunately it never occurred to us 
to do that!
4 The chapter backgrounds include original artwork by painter Hope LeVan who, ironically, did character 
concept paintings for Disney in the 1980s. Similarly, the music by Rick Benjamin’s Paragon Orchestra 
was cleared and used with permission. In another touch of irony, that orchestra also supplied the music 
for Disney Theme Park’s Main Street Parade.
5 One of the more difficult words to find was “fourteen,” which we needed to express the original duration 
of copyright terms—14 years. Fortunately in 101 Dalmatians , there is initially a litter of 15 puppies but 
one is initially thought to have died. We were put in the awkward position of gleefully celebrating that 
puppy’s near death.
Bibliography
Faden, Eric “A Fair(y) Use Tale.” In Freedom of Expression (DVD) . Kembrew McLeod, Media Education 
Foundation, 2007. http://www.mediaed.org/cgi-bin/commerce.cgi?preadd=action&key=127 
(accessed August 20, 2014).
——. “Crowd Control.” Journal of Film and Video  53, no. 2/3 (2001): 93–106.
49539
AN AESTHETICS 
OF DECEPTION IN 
POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO
Diran Lyons
Political remix video (PRV) appropriates media familiar to the general public: film, TV , 
news broadcasts, sometimes even still photography. The video editor exploits this famili -
arity to critical effect. When one sees, for example, George W . Bush or Barack Obama 
in a political remix, they no longer espouse the platitudes and clichés of US foreign 
policy, the state of the US economy, or other official governmental positions. The new 
video work recalibrates its sources in order to repudiate the ideologies embedded within 
them, positing what the artist holds to be a corrective lens to the postures initially 
propagated by mainstream media, Hollywood, and other powerful institutions.
When I first encountered the PRV community online in the fall of 2007, I saw the art 
form as an exciting new tributary for my creative pursuits. It conjoins an aesthetics of 
deception, video art, and the topical politics that my work often engages with in other 
media. My artistic oeuvre is difficult to classify: I make objects and sculptural installa -
tions, large-scale paintings, performance art, and video, incorporating these elements 
into a use of art that develops the idea of the aesthetic object as something that intrinsi -
cally peddles in deception.1
In all my work, the main objective is to blur the distinctions between fiction and 
nonfiction, subjectivity and objectivity, and a concrete truth versus what one could 
describe as a “creative lie.” Through different types of illusion, the creative lie intention -
ally imbues the work of art with an inability to tell the truth immediately or straightfor -
wardly. Rather, it pulls the wool over a viewer’s eyes to encourage the contemplation of 
a greater truth that lies behind it. In what follows, I examine three political remixes I 
created between 2010 and 2012 with respect to their capacity to offer alternative view -
points through illusion.
Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of  
the Nobel Peace Prize  (2010)
Less than a full year into President Obama’s first term in office, I uploaded to YouTube  
Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , a seven-minute remixed 
narrative that distinguished itself as the first within the PRV genre to reach #1 on the 
496
D. LYONSIMDb most popular shorts ratings ( Figure 39.1 ). The video addresses US foreign policy 
under Obama’s direction and provides a clear example of fabricating a convincing inter -
action between characters from unrelated sources. Formally, it is also associated with 
what contemporary film theorist Gilles Deleuze calls a time-image.
The time-image disrupts the continuous movement of cause and effect through dis -
continuity, alluring a viewer to ponder the time between shots.2 While planning the 
remix, I decided that propelling the transformative story via a linear procession of events 
would be less effective for what I wanted to accomplish. In order to accentuate the 
“coming of age” trope, I opted to present haphazard timelines, jumping back and forth 
between future and past. As such, the narrative repeatedly foregrounds their difference 
and at times even creates a fictitious simultaneity between the two: The montage effec -
tively pictorializes a type of temporal circuit where future and past timelines appear to 
conflate. This artifice takes place most forcefully toward the middle of the remix, where 
the younger Gyllenhaal character (from Donnie Darko ) stares at the elder version (in 
Jarhead ) on a TV screen. The latter’s facial expression suggests disappointment toward 
his counterpart, creating one of the more poignant moments in the video.
That juncture is the dividing point in the story where Gyllenhaal begins to radically 
revise his perspectives. Over the course of the remix, he changes his thinking so  
thoroughly that in the video’s closing moments he fervently contradicts the initial prop -
ositions he first espoused. At the beginning of the video, Gyllenhaal approaches a 
microphone to address the president and pronounce that Obama’s citation of the Golden 
Figure 39.1   Jake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel Peace Prize on IMDB.com
497
AN AESTHETICS OF DECEPTION IN PRVRule (in the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech) was the worst advice he had 
ever heard. However, after experiencing some of the brutality of war—I use footage from 
Jarhead  that depicts him fighting overseas, flirting with death under enemy fire, and see -
ing Iraqi civilians burnt to a crisp by US bombing raids—the video concludes with 
Gyllenhaal taking odds with Obama’s admonition that those who desperately want 
peace must understand that sometimes war is necessary. Certainly Gyllenhaal and 
Obama never actually sat down together to discuss foreign policy, but the video manu -
factures the illusion of a Hollywood actor rebuking Obama for his prowar rhetoric, 
something that unfortunately still remains a rarity four years after the remix’s debut.
Obama Likes Spending (Project 12, 3/12)  (2010)
A little over a year later, I established a rigorous code to shepherd the production of a 
remix that pokes fun at the US government’s spendthrift proclivities. The result was 
Obama Likes Spending (Project 12, 3/12) , a tedious, six-and-a-half minute supercut 
(Figure 39.2 ). A supercut is a rapid and obsessive succession of clips focused on a specific 
phenomenon, usually a behavior, word, or phrase from mainstream media.
The stricture of rules for the video was as extensive as it was obsessive. The only 
sources permitted in the video were those from the White House video archive. The 
time I chose to post the work online had to playfully triangulate the month of the year, 
the number of years Obama had served in office, and the video’s position within my 
Project 12  series, which was a year-long undertaking that featured a new upload on the 
twelfth day of each month.3 The video satisfied this stipulation by being posted during 
the third month of 2011, in the third year of Obama’s presidency, and as the third video 
of Project 12 . The US budget, the Troubled Asset Relief Program, and the Recovery Act 
(otherwise referred to as Obama’s stimulus package) were the objects of great contro -
versy during the many months leading up to the video, so immediately after completing 
the second installment of Project 12 , I committed to locate each instance of Obama’s use 
Figure 39.2   Obama Likes Spending (Project 12), 3/12 , Diran Lyons, 2010 (6:24), http://
youtu.be/K-JuE9esfUc (courtesy of the artist)
498
D. LYONSof the words “spend,” “spent,” and “spending” throughout his term in office.4 The 
instances had to be in reverse chronological order, i.e., from March 12, 2011 backward 
and noted at the bottom of the screen. Every 60-second interval had to feature at least 
one humorous phrase, such as “Spend money to spend it,” “I spent your tax dollars,” 
“Spend money on out of control government spending and spending,” etc. The phrases 
could be contrived through editing or unaltered as they exist in the original video docu -
ments, but their function was to break up an otherwise relentless relay, featuring over 
600 examples.
The supercut form usually exposes an actual phenomenon viewers may tend to over -
look. However, as the key function of a creative lie is the use of illusion to inculcate the 
consideration of alternative viewpoints, Obama Likes Spending  underscores our national 
leader’s repetitive script and reduces him to a consumerism-pushing, bobblehead doll. 
The rigor required to generate the video was overwhelming, but it is also overwhelming 
to watch. “Spending” begins to lose its meaning and transforms into a type of audiovisual 
water torture, where each utterance of the word leaves the viewer increasingly desensi -
tized and disarranged. It is in this state that new modes of thinking hopefully lead the 
viewer toward considerations of fiscal responsibility at a time when the national deficit 
is $17.5 trillion.
Through its straightforward gesture, remix also suggests a dark underbelly of the fed -
eral government’s exorbitant spending spree amidst the worst financial crisis since the 
Great Depression. While many of the video’s excerpts derive from contexts in which 
Obama argued for investment in US education and infrastructure, the remix forges the 
illusion that Obama enjoys entrenching US taxpayers into deeper debt and debasing the 
purchasing power of the dollar in concert with the Federal Reserve’s “quantitative eas -
ing,” i.e., printing trillions in fiat money to buttress the fragile economy.5 Even if financ -
ing the federal budget by printing money temporarily averts financial collapse, there is 
a great deal of legitimate concern about the amount, the execution, and the excessively 
high expectations created by the president himself for how well this will work in the 
long-term.
99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix)  (2012)
My 99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix)  employs fragments of public speeches by 
President Obama to the instrumental of hip hop artist Jay-Z’s song by the same title 
(Figure 39.3 ). The lyrics present many of the original’s key statements, the majority of 
the profanity, and a comparable dialog to Jay-Z’s argument with a racist policeman. In 
the remix, Mitt Romney performs the cop’s role, antagonizing Obama in a type of rap 
battle. A side-by-side comparison of the two songs makes plain the degree of fidelity the 
new work has to its referent. Of the 481 total words Jay-Z wrote in the first two verses, 
the remix preserves over 50%. Where the words diverge, the video offers nonpartisan 
criticism of both candidates, though as is appropriate it speaks truthiness to the man who 
had the most power at that time.
Before further examining the content of the song, a word about the lyric construction 
is in order. It is here that the creative lie is most evident. Viewers in the video’s comment 
section wondered how the lyrics featured words Obama had not used in his public 
speeches. Entertainment Weekly  inaccurately speculated that I used a source of profane 
recordings by the president.6 Fundamental to the completion of the work was engaging 
the atomic structure of political remix: New meanings can emerge through extracting 
499
AN AESTHETICS OF DECEPTION IN PRVindivisible phonemes, the strategic juxtaposition of these units forms morphemes (a 
linguistic term for words), and this diachronic linguistic process makes it possible to 
augment a cultural meme, or catchphrase, like the one found in the chorus of Jay-Z’s 
track, a hook he himself appropriated from an early 1990s song by Ice T.
By using the precision of digital video editing software to separate the sounds of a 
given word into irreducible parts, it becomes possible for an editor to extract the smallest 
audible bits and recombine them with sounds from other words. This process opens the 
possibility of making a remixed speaker appear to say any word the editor wants. For 
example, separating the f from a word like fundamental and pairing it with the final 
three letters in tr uck enabled me to create the convincing appearance of Obama cursing. 
Moreover, Obama never used the word “conspiracy” in his first term in office, but a 
subtle blend of the words consider, spirit, and democ racy provided the requisite phono -
logical relationships. I filled the video with literally dozens of words, explicit or other -
wise, that underwent such revision. Similar to how a painter might celebrate the texture 
of brushstrokes rather than intentionally conceal their presence in a representational 
painting, on some occasions I allowed the original imagery to remain coupled with its 
audible component in order to visually expose the adjoining cut in my process of forging 
new words. The imagery toggles in the middle of a word from one portrait of Obama to 
another, thereby revealing the sound manipulation. In most instances, however, I 
located imagery of lip movements which are visually similar to those of the explicit 
words I coerced Obama to say. A clip of Obama saying “funding,” for example, suffices 
as a realistic surrogate for the gerund form of the curse word I alluded to above.
Although an undertone of the remix questions Obama’s association with a pop culture 
icon whose songs over the years have included filthy language, misogynist lyrics, and 
homophobic slurs, the mashup centers on the 2012 presidential election and the perfor -
mance of our first African American president. The commentary begins with a 
Figure 39.3   99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix) , Diran Lyons, 2012 (2:35), http://youtu.
be/2C22wBf2h5k (courtesy of the artist)
500
D. LYONSstatement about the 2011 left-leaning Occupy Wall Street protests, maintaining that 
Obama works for the banks. Contrary to the Tea Party protests of 2009, the Occupy 
movement ventured to critique corporate capitalism. Like his predecessor Bush and 
despite his many tough words, Obama supported the bank bailouts, received record Wall 
Street campaign contributions, and surrounded himself with economic advisors and 
appointees from financial institutions. The opening lines of the first verse declare that 
Obama will side on behalf of his “Wall Street brothers,” i.e., corporate controllers. 
Because his allegiance is to the financial megaliths, the remix’s prognosis is a reelection 
victory with no reason for trepidation in facing Mitt Romney.
Obama starts the second verse by describing the condition of the US economy following  
his rise to the White House:
The year is 2009 and the White House is mine
But the economy’s in full mother (expletive) decline
My choices at the time were to (expletive) on the poor
Or fellate the banks to get elected once more
Instead of punishing the biggest financial institutions for their carelessness in the 
lead-up to the economic meltdown of 2008, they remained unscathed under Obama, 
receiving a second set of bailouts after Bush issued the first. Conversely, the finan -
cial situation of many Americans continued to erode on Obama’s watch. For exam -
ple, he did not honor campaign promises to protect homeowners from foreclosure 
through the Home Affordable Modification Program, spelling catastrophe for nearly 
a million people.7
In Jay-Z’s version of the second verse, he gets pulled over by a racist police officer 
while transporting cocaine inside the trunk. In the Obama–Romney battle, instead of 
asking to search his trunk, Romney challenges Obama to verify his citizenship:
I ain’t steppin’ down from (expletive) ’cause this president’s legit
(Romney) Well, do you mind if we see that birth certificate?
All my records are blocked, you conspiracy hack
And I know my rights. So, you gon’ need a warrant for that
This passage takes a shot at both candidates, making Romney pander to the Tea Party 
in its unremitting incredulity of Obama’s citizenship, while blaming the president for 
allowing the issue to fester and ultimately hijack political discourse. Had Obama pre -
sented the document when the concerns first emerged, the entire distraction likely 
could have been avoided.
Finally, the outro problematizes the comparison of Obama to Martin Luther King, Jr. 
Echoing outspoken critics such as Chris Hedges, the closing lines accuse Obama of war 
profiteering:8
Criminal, fraud, repression, deceit
I murder and I plunder for the world elite
We invade countries till we have all they own
(King) I have a dream
Well, I have a drone
501
AN AESTHETICS OF DECEPTION IN PRVSome commentators esteemed Obama’s 2009 election as the realization of Dr. King’s 
“dream,” as articulated in MLK’s “I Have a Dream” speech. The mic drop quickly mani -
fests the contrast between the two figures. King’s dream and predator drones are irrec -
oncilable: He contested militarism and called the United States “the greatest purveyor 
of violence on the planet.”9 Regrettably, Obama’s foreign policy perpetuated and intensi -
fied the violent political scene he inherited, lacking the commitment to restraint in the 
pursuit of peace that King preached.
Concluding Remarks
Part of my motivation in making these works was to address progressives still invested 
in the left-versus-right political dichotomy. In conversations with liberals during 
Obama’s first term, I repeatedly heard the argument that Bush made this whole mess, 
and we should give Obama more time to fix it. I disagreed with the latter and reflected 
that, in terms of illusion, nothing is worse than self-deception. It should be axiomatic 
that a candidate backed by record bank contributions will not resist business as usual. A 
tree is known by its fruits. Obama pushed for more bank bailouts as soon as he got into 
office. The peace laureate expanded the wars and started new preemptive military 
actions in Libya and Pakistan, threatening others along the way. He failed to deliver on 
promises to close Guantanamo Bay. He escalated the use of drone attacks, crafted secret 
kill lists, and refused to investigate the Bush Administration on rendition and domestic 
spying. He reauthorized the Patriot Act, signed the National Defense Authorization Act 
(which authorizes the disappearance of US citizens without trial), presided over the 
installation of intrusive full-body scanners at airports, and defended the National 
Security Agency’s totalitarian surveillance of the public.
In each case, had McCain or Romney done the same, the progressive left likely would 
have pushed hard against them. However, since Obama is a Democrat, many I talked 
with concocted a litany of justifications. As a card-carrying Democratic Party supporter 
since reaching the legal age to vote in 1996, I knew the risk involved in making the 
videos. For me, though, it was a matter of political consistency and conviction: I could 
not oppose Bush as vociferously as I did and then give a Democratic president an uncriti -
cal pass. In short, we should resist “hope and change” sponsored by Goldman Sachs, the 
corporate elite, and the military industrial complex, striving to advance discourse that 
catalyzes the creation of a more peaceful and prosperous world.
Notes
1 This estimation reflects Friedrich Nietzsche’s writings on aesthetics.
2 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 2: The Time-Image , trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Roberta Galeta (Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1989), 41.
3 Project 12  utilized a film production model where I directed the videos and collaborated with different 
script co-writers, including Stephen Mears, Vrüden Jakov, and Desiree D’Alessandro.
4 The remix fell short of this specific ambition at the deadline, locating Obama’s words only through the 
summer of 2009.
5 Paul Craig Roberts, “How Economists and Policymakers Murdered Our Economy,” January 25, 2014, 
http://www.paulcraigroberts.org/2014/01/25/economists-policymakers-murdered-economy-paul-craig-
roberts.
6 Hillary Busis, “Obama’s Got 99 Problems, but a Mitt Ain’t One—NSFW VIDEO,” September 28, 2012. 
http://popwatch.ew.com/2012/09/28/obama-99-problems-remix.
502
D. LYONS7 Neil M. Barofsky, “Where the Bank Bailout Went Wrong,” The New York Times , March 29, 2011, http://
www.nytimes.com/2011/03/30/opinion/30barofsky.html?_r=0.
8 Chris Hedges, “Time to Get Crazy,” Truthdig, July 2, 2012, http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/time_to_
get_crazy_20120702. 
9 Martin Luther King, Jr. “Why I Am Opposed to the War in Vietnam,” April 30, 1967, Riverside Church, 
New York. Media Resources Center, Moffitt Library, UC Berkeley, http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/MRC/
pacificaviet/riversidetranscript.html.
Bibliography
Barofsky, Neil M. “Where the Bank Bailout Went Wrong.” The New York Times , March 29, 2011 http://
www.nytimes.com/2011/03/30/opinion/30barofsky.html?_r=0 (accessed on April 14, 2014).
Busis, Hillary. “Obama’s Got 99 Problems, but a Mitt Ain’t One—NSFW VIDEO.” September 28, 
2012. http://popwatch.ew.com/2012/09/28/obama-99-problems-remix (accessed April 14, 2014).
Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 2: The Time-Image . Translated by Hugh Tomlinson and Roberta Galeta. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1989.
Hedges, Chris. Time to Get Crazy . Truthdig, July 2, 2012. http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/time_
to_get_crazy_20120702 (accessed on April 14, 2014).
King, Martin Luther, Jr. Why I Am Opposed to the War in Vietnam . April 30, 1967, Riverside Church, 
New York. Media Resources Center, Moffitt Library, UC Berkeley. http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/
MRC/pacificaviet/riversidetranscript.html (accessed on April 14, 2014).
Roberts, Paul Craig. “How Economists and Policymakers Murdered Our Economy.” January 25, 2014. 
http://www.paulcraigroberts.org/2014/01/25/economists-policymakers-murdered-economy-paul-
craig-roberts (accessed April 14, 2014).
40
RADICAL REMIX
Manifestoon
Jesse Drew
Viral clips of appropriated, reused, and recut commercial and governmental video and sound 
have by now become standard weapons of political discourse in our media-saturated  
societies. The content of these no-budget, amateur, and often legally dubious video clips 
range from mild sarcasm and mockery to cinematic salvos against multinational corpora -
tions or governments. With the growth of the Internet and relatively easy access to new 
digital tools, the speed and viral nature of remix video has propelled the form from a 
somewhat fringe-practice within the fine arts to a mass cultural phenomenon.
Manifestoon
My contribution to the arena of political remix is the bricolage Manifestoon ,1 an homage 
to Marx and Engels’s Communist Manifesto . The impetus for Manifestoon  was the dissolu -
tion of the Soviet Union, and the widespread implication that any alternative to the 
neoliberal economic ordering of society was no longer possible. I had spent some time 
in East Germany as the Berlin Wall was coming down and produced a film ( Deutschemarks 
Uber Alles! )2 based on East German activists who advocated a “third way” to govern, 
negotiating the polarity between Soviet-style state control and West German capital. 
In the aftermath I was inspired to go to the source of what is perhaps the most influential 
piece of writing in modern history, The Communist Manifesto .3 I was surprised to find 
how contemporary the 1848 Manifesto  sounded in the 1990s, and noted how little had 
changed since its publication. I was reminded of how Marx referred to revolutionary 
ideas as an “old mole” that kept being driven underground, only to reappear again 
throughout history. This “old mole” conjured up a comical cartoon figure, and I soon 
began seeing the Manifesto  through the eyes of anthropomorphic cartoon characters. 
Reflecting on my own cultural upbringing, I realized how important cartoons had been 
to my stance in life, particularly the “good guy” character Bugs Bunny, who always 
defeated the bad guys thanks to his wits, street smarts, determination, and sense of 
humor. In using cartoons as a vehicle to relay Marx and Engels’s message, I stripped the 
words from the historical baggage that surrounds them. My intention was that by mixing 
the Manifesto  with popular, beloved cartoons, people could consider Marx and Engels’s 
ideas without prejudice, with a sense of humor rather than a grim countenance. I chose 
early American cartoons, not only because of my familiarity, but because they embodied 
the type of labor Marx and Engels discuss in their writing. Early cartoons were 
504
J. DREWhandmade, cell by cell, rather than by automation and computers. Aesthetically, cell 
animations are beautiful works of art in their own right.
Using the common remix strategy of harvesting images, I set my VCR to record a two-
hour time slot every morning, capturing traditional Looney Tunes and Merry Melodies 
cartoons. Every morning I would run downstairs to my basement before I had to get my 
daughter off to school and make sure the “trap” had sprung. Later in the evening, I would 
scan through the tape to see what I caught. I downloaded the text of the Manifesto  online 
from Project Gutenberg and redacted it to make it shorter and less cumbersome, cutting 
the more polemical aspects of it written to respond to debates of the day. I recorded a friend 
reading the version, and laid down that track on the tape. From that point on, I pulled 
appropriate images from the capture tape and insert-edited them into the master. The 
entire project was done on a cuts-only Super VHS tape machine that had the added 
advantage of a time-base corrector to allow minimal color correction. The title was done 
with an Amiga Video Toaster that was connected to the system.
When the master was complete I created a dub for viewing, showing mostly to friends 
at video gatherings where remixers and culture jammers often met. It was then shown 
at Other Cinema in San Francisco, where it was met with appreciation. I dubbed more 
copies and sent them to film festivals, resulting in dozens of public screenings. I took the 
tape to an industrial copy service and made 100 more copies, made labels, and sent them 
to venues and festivals around the country, with much success. The tape was picked up 
for distribution by the Video Data Bank, arguably one of the largest distributors of video 
art in the United States. They included it in a special packaged anthology of new work, 
called “The New McLennium,”4 which was played at many venues internationally and 
nationally.5 A highlight was its selection by the German Zentrum für Kunst und 
Medientechnologie  (ZKM) to be played on German national television as one of the 
best videos of their festival. For the ZKM, Manifestoon  was described as:
an homage to the latent subversiveness of cartoons. Though American cartoons 
are usually thought of as conveying consumerist and individualistic ideologies, 
as an avid fan of cartoons as a child, these ideas were secondary to a more 
important lesson—that of the “trickster” nature of many cartoon characters as 
they mocked, outwitted, and ultimately defeated their stronger, more powerful 
adversaries. In the classic cartoon, brute strength and heavy artillery are no 
match for wit and humor, and justice always prevails. These cartoon clips are 
all from different cartoons, with the exception of one or two, and reflect a broad 
range of the classic traditional Hollywood animations. In Manifestoon , the 
image of Mickey running over the globe has new meaning in the current media -
scape in which Disney now controls one of the largest concentrations of media 
ownership in the world. But it could be asked, is he gaining ground, or could he 
be running away from the revolt of the dispossessed ’toons?6
Eventually, the festival outlets became saturated and the tape received less and less 
festival play. I prepared to put Manifestoon  out to pasture, pleased that an experimental 
video remix with political intent had been widely seen. After that, I had not paid atten -
tion to its activity until one day in 2006 when I heard from a friend that he saw it on 
YouTube—a surprise, as I never uploaded the file. I ran a Google search. The sites I came 
upon not only hosted Manifestoon , but had more than one million total hits on YouTube. 
It was also on many other sites as well. A positive review of it on Boing Boing7 
505
RADICAL REMIX: MANIFESTOONaccelerated its distribution tremendously and I lost track of the sites posting it. I then 
began to notice it in different languages, both subtitled and overdubbed. I began receiv -
ing emails with requests for versions of it without the narration, so they could dub it into 
their own language. I also received emails asking for the text of the piece, to ease writing 
subtitles for it, and I happily complied. I have seen Manifestoon  in at least ten different 
languages, including Greek, Arabic, French, German, Italian, Turkish, and others. The 
power of Internet distribution is shocking, as the global audience reached was simply not 
possible with the tape and festival route that had been the norm only a few years before. 
The impact of Manifestoon  was truly on a mass and international scale, and more demo -
cratic in many ways, as it was reaching people who would not normally attend festivals 
or otherwise participate in an underground culture. One of the most inspiring notices 
was from an indigenous political community in Brazil, who wrote telling me how much 
they enjoyed the tape and that they used it at their community gatherings.
Splicers, Glue, and Flatbeds, Oh My
Along with Manifestoon , in the 1990s there were many other political remixes on the 
VCR-analog/computer-digital cusp that flashed on video screens across networks of 
alternative film venues, night clubs, galleries, museums, and living rooms. One of the 
most influential remix artists to emerge in the 1980s and 1990s is San Francisco-based 
montage/collage filmmaker Craig Baldwin, an artist who stubbornly clung to working in 
actual celluloid against the intrusion of video tape. Tribulation 998 is Baldwin’s epic sci-fi 
homage, a dense, visually rich hallucination that cuts, mixes, and clashes popular “con -
spiracy theory” stories with actual political conspiracies, slashing together CIA plots and 
political assassinations with moon creatures and alien pyramid builders. Subsequent 
films such as Sonic Outlaws ,9 Spectres of the Spectrum ,10 and Mockup on Mu11 have 
cemented Baldwin’s place in the pantheon of radical remixers and found-footage artists. 
Baldwin’s proselytizing has helped develop a global appreciation for the radical remix, 
along with the slogan “Copyright Violation Is Your Greatest Entertainment Value.” 
Much of Baldwin’s work tears into the heart of corporate censorship and the main ene -
mies of remix work—the copyright police and the limitless aggressive legal tactics of 
trade groups like the MPAA (Motion Picture Association of America) and the RIAA 
(Recording Industry Association of America). Baldwin’s work has often championed the 
media pirates who resist what he considers legal censorship. Sonic Outlaws  for example, 
highlights Negativland, the music group that has been in the forefront of resisting cul -
tural censorship, tangling with the Irish rock band U2 as well as pop music personality 
Casey Kasem.
While artists such as Baldwin continued to work with the medium of film, others 
became enthralled with the dual VCR technique, as it allowed access to readily avail -
able images from commercial television, and did not require much technical knowl -
edge or the specialized equipment used by filmmakers: splicers, glue, winders, flatbeds, 
and other equipment. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the proliferation of consumer-
level television production equipment fueled an upsurge in radical remix, allied with 
the practice of culture-jamming that included billboard alteration, graffiti, doctored 
advertising posters, and audio remixes. According to author David Cox, “culture jam -
ming is sabotage at the symbolic level.”12 The culture-jamming phenomenon was 
spurred along by glossy Canadian magazine Adbusters , which regularly solicited and 
printed the reworking of ads by readers. Processed World , a magazine published in  
506
J. DREWSan Francisco, was also a rich source of culture-jamming graphics and illustrations. 
The advent of Photoshop and the introduction of low-cost flatbed scanners also ener -
gized the culture-jamming communities. Graphic artists, fine artists, musicians, and 
video remixers cross-pollinated, influencing each other and stimulating a prolific 
period of memorable video remixes. One such memorable video remix starred Ronald 
and Nancy Reagan as they launched their newly founded “war on drugs.”13 In the 
video, made by Cliff Roth, the Reagans’ national address was mocked, as Ron and 
Nancy were remixed to explain the benefits of hard drugs and the fact that “they are 
hooked on heroin.” Artists of the Emergency Broadcast Network (EBN) spread the 
word through their performative video remixes geared for the club scene.14 EBN 
remixes included rapid paced, danceable remixes on such themes as psychoactive 
drugs, the Gulf War, and violence in popular culture. Special Report15 by Bryan Boyce 
was an equally hilarious critique of television news, hijacked so that “respectable” 
television broadcast personalities were mixed with the voices of low-budget horror 
movies and confessed to conspiratorial plots to take over planet earth.
Phil Patiris, a renowned found-footage remixer, operated out of a rundown storefront 
in San Francisco, surrounded by banks of salvaged VCRs that he kept on record/play, 
capturing thousands of hours of broadcast footage. On a bare-bones computer, he would 
log each tape, which he recorded on six-hour speed, entering keywords that would allow 
him to find the clip or program or ad at a later time. One of the most popular programs 
that remixers would set their VCRs for was the US Super Bowl, the premiere venue for 
high budget commercials and superpatriot hype in the US. Patiris became the go-to 
source for important media moments or broadcast bloopers that remixers craved. When 
the First Gulf War erupted, the so-called Desert Storm, Phil’s operation was a hub of 
activity, as the “media war” became great fodder for political remixers who wanted to 
point out the prowar, government collaborationist slant of the major broadcasters. 
Patiris’s own work, The Iraq Campaign ,16 became one of the most widely viewed remixes 
of the war, ingeniously mixing the science fiction film Dune  with the coverage of Desert 
Storm. The Iraq Campaign  specifically focused on the over-the-top slick graphics and 
animation openings of the networks, as they sought to glamorize and heroicize the mas -
sacres happening on the ground in the Middle East.
The widespread availability of remixing and mashup software tools and skills has 
made the political remix standard fare and part of millions of people’s inboxes, to the 
point where such work becomes a daily comment, rather than a crafted work of art to 
be viewed and discussed more carefully. This is the promise and the peril of radical remix 
in the digital age. Not long ago, the Bryan Boyce mashup video that inserted George 
Bush Jr. into the children’s utopia of Teletubbies17 was a humorously shocking construc -
tion to behold. Today remix is less novel, but still delights and surprises viewers. No one 
asks anymore, “How did they do that?” On the other hand, the instant commentary it 
provides allows it to become an instantaneous audio/visual expression that can enrich 
and extend public discourse. The acquisition of media tropes and the quick remix of 
them into memes is a lively demonstration of such language. On the University of 
California, Davis campus, the casual pepper-spraying of protesting students captured on 
cell phone cameras sparked its own meme, allowing respondents the opportunity to 
place the image of brutality across history, from Renaissance paintings to rock ’n’ roll 
album covers. The public deployment of the political remix has moved the practice out 
of the realm of the skilled craftsperson and the fine artist and moved it within easier 
reach of the general public. While some may argue that in doing so it has lost its power, 
507
RADICAL REMIX: MANIFESTOONit could also be argued that in doing so it has spread its roots ever more deeply into the 
popular political consciousness, challenging the public to respond to media spectacles 
rather than passively ingest them.
Notes
 1 Jesse Drew, Manifestoon  (1995, Mission Creek Video), video, 9:00, https://archive.org/details/Manifestoon.
 2 Jesse Drew, Deutschemarks Uber Alles!  (1990; San Francisco, Mission Creek Video) (not online), video, 
58:00, referenced at http://www.worldcat.org/title/deutschemarks-uber-alles-the-failure-of-east-germanys-
silent-revolution-a-documentary/oclc/27065180.
 3 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto  (1848), full text at http://www.gutenberg.org/
ebooks/61.
 4 “The New McLennium,” video series by Video Data Bank (1998, Chicago, Video Data Bank) referenced 
at http://www.vdb.org/titles/new-mclennium.
 5 For a partial list of screenings, http://www.jessedrew.com/ Manifestoon .html.
 6 ZKM Award Notes (1998, Karlsruhe, Germany) http://on1.zkm.de/zkm/e/IMKP50/3.
 7 Cory Doctorow, “Communist Manifesto Remixed from Vintage Toons,” Boing Boing , November 14, 2006, 
http://boingboing.net/2006/11/14/communist-manifesto.html.
 8 Craig Baldwin, Tribulation 99  (San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1991), video, 1:37:00, http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html.
 9 Craig Baldwin, Sonic Outlaws  (San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1995), video, 1:27:00, http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html.
10 Craig Baldwin, Spectres of the Spectrum  (San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1999), video, 1:31:00, http://
www.othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html.
11 Craig Baldwin, Mockup on Mu  (San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 2008), video, 1:50:00, http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html.
12 David Cox, Sign Wars: The Culture Jammers Strike Back  (Australia: LedaTape, 2005), 140.
Figure 40.1  Still from Manifestoon  by Jesse Drew, 1995 (image courtesy of the artist)
508
J. DREW13 Cliff Roth, The Reagans Speak Out on Drugs  (1988), YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=La5jrfobfTM.
14 Emergency Broadcast Network, EBN, online videos at https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTebmul
FR8XzkxrJviGycCa7ZMormNuvn.
15 Bryan Boyce, Special Report  (1999), YouTube video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1h2rPvrUr8.
16 “Iraq Campaign 1991  by Phil Patiris Now Online,” Boing Boing  (July 28, 2009), http://boingboing.
net/2009/07/28/iraq-campaign-1991-b.html
17 “Bryan Boyce,” in Kate Horsfield and Lucas Hilderbrand, eds., Feedback: The Video Data Bank Catalog of 
Video Art and Artist Interviews  (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2006), 67.
Bibliography
Baldwin, Craig. Tribulation 99 . San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1991. Video, 1:37:00. http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
——. Sonic Outlaws . San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1995. Video, 1:27:00. http://www.othercinema.
com/cbfilmography.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
——. Spectres of the Spectrum . San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 1999. Video, 1:31:00. http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
——. Mockup on Mu . San Francisco, CA: Other Cinema, 2008. Video, 1:50:00. http://www.
othercinema.com/cbfilmography.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
Boyce, Bryan, Special Report.  1999. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1h2rPvrUr8 
(accessed August 21, 2014).
“Bryan Boyce.” In Kate Horsfield and Lucas Hilderbrand, eds. Feedback: The Video Data Bank Catalog 
of Video Art and Artist Interviews . Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2006.
Cox, David. Sign Wars: The Culture Jammers Strike Back . Australia: LedaTape, 2005.
Doctorow, Cory, “Communist Manifesto Remixed from Vintage Toons.” Boing Boing , November 14, 
2006. http://boingboing.net/2006/11/14/communist-manifesto.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
Drew, Jesse, Deutschemarks Uber Alles!  San Francisco, CA: Mission Creek Video, 1990. Video, 58:00. 
Not online, referenced at: http://www.worldcat.org/title/deutschemarks-uber-alles-the-failure-of-
east-germanys-silent-revolution-a-documentary/oclc/27065180 (accessed August 21, 2014).
——. Manifestoon . San Francisco, CA: Mission Creek Video, 1995. Video, 9:00. https://archive.org/
details/Manifestoon (accessed August 21, 2014).
Emergency Broadcast Network, EBN. Online videos at https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTeb
mulFR8XzkxrJviGycCa7ZMormNuvn (accessed August 21, 2014).
“Iraq Campaign 1991  by Phil Patiris Now Online.” Boing Boing , July 28, 2009. http://boingboing.
net/2009/07/28/iraq-campaign-1991-b.html (accessed August 21, 2014).
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. The Communist Manifesto  (1848). Full text at http://www.gutenberg.
org/ebooks/61 (accessed August 21, 2014).
“The New McLennium.” Video series by Video Data Bank. Chicago, IL: Video Data Bank, 1998. 
Referenced at http://www.vdb.org/titles/new-mclennium (accessed August 21, 2014).
Roth, Cliff. The Reagans Speak Out on Drugs . Filmed 1988. YouTube video. Posted March 2, 2012. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=La5jrfobfTM (accessed August 21, 2014).
ZKM Award Notes. Karlsruhe, Germany, 1998. http://on1.zkm.de/zkm/e/IMKP50/3 (accessed August 
21, 2014).
41
IN TWO MINDS
Kevin Atherton
This chapter is about a performance art work that I remixed using video footage from 
the 1970s to generate a dialog with my former self. In Two Minds  began straightforwardly 
enough in the winter of 1978 when I first performed it at the Project Arts Centre in 
Dublin. At that time I had no intention of presenting it again over 30 years later. In its 
current form in 2014 its claim to a place within remix culture rests on the extent to 
which the live performance reframes the work’s original meanings and intentions into 
a new and convincing whole. Unlike many of my previous performance pieces from the 
Seventies, this one was documented ( Figure 41.1 ). Previously I had rigidly adhered to 
the tenets of performance art, which driven by its bid to distinguish itself from theater, 
had two key rules. The first was that there should be no repeat performance; the second 
Figure 41.1   In Two Minds , video performance, Project Arts Centre, Dublin, March 1978 
(photo: Nigel Rolfe)
510
K. ATHERTONwas that there must be no documentation, or, as I realize now looking at the grainy black 
and white negatives from that night in 1978, at least no decent  documentation.
The particular evening in March at the Project Arts Centre, the gallery space was 
arranged with a video monitor sitting on a chair placed opposite an identical, empty 
chair. The audience were also positioned facing one another sitting in two rows—
“Wimbledon-style”—either side of the corridor of space between the two facing chairs 
(Figure 41.1 ). The performance began when I walked forward to the empty chair and 
sat down. On the facing monitor a videotape I had recorded earlier that day began to 
ask questions: “Is this a video work or a performance?” In response to the question I 
replied: “It’s a video work.” When my recorded self quickly replied with: “But surely 
you’re performing right now,” the performance got its first laugh as the audience 
responded to the uncanny nature of the interchange between the live and recorded 
versions of myself. The performance continued in this vein for 30 minutes, with the 
questions ranging across a number of topics concerning video, performance, and 
television.
During a month in 1978 I performed the “first” version of In Two Minds  three times, 
each time recording a new question tape,1 in Dublin and Farnham in Ireland, and 
Belfast in Northern Ireland, and although each performance received a strong response 
from the audience, I felt at the time that I had pushed it as far as I could go. That 
might have been it if I hadn’t been selected by the artist Stuart Brisley to be in a group 
exhibition at the Serpentine Gallery in London. Chosen as one of five artists to share 
the Serpentine Gallery and given the opportunity of having a space to myself for the 
three weeks of the “Spring Show” the logical thing to do was to record the answers on 
videotape as well and to make In Two Minds  as a video installation that, with a little 
bit of technical help from the gallery assistants, could play throughout the run of the 
show on its own.
At the Serpentine, in keeping with the Dublin performance, the audience was divided 
into two groups facing one another sitting on two gallery benches ( Figure 41.2 ). Like 
spectators at a tennis match, the audience had no option but to swing their heads from 
side to side, as they followed the dialog between the two monitors while questions and 
answers were verbally batted backward and forward across the space. Now an installa -
tion in a gallery and unable by its very nature to respond to a live audience, the work 
nevertheless continued to be humorous in nature but extended its largely self-referential 
frame of reference to include questions that challenged the primacy of the gallery. With 
no intention of repeating the work, I was happy that when the Serpentine exhibition 
came to the end of its three-week run, In Two Minds—Installation Version  and In Two 
Minds  in general, as a series of performances, would come to an end as well.
T wenty-eight years later in 2006, more as a reaction to the trauma of the death of my 
wife than as a career maneuver (at the time my art career was the last thing on my 
mind), I rerecorded a new answer tape to In Two Minds—Installation Version  and thus 
“reentered”2 the work as a part of the process of producing a new installation, which this 
time around would for the first time involve video projection ( Figure 41.3 ). To make the 
work, I wore similar clothes to those that I’d worn in the Serpentine video installation 
in 1978, and sitting on a table, recorded myself answering the questions put to me by my 
27-year-old self on the original Serpentine tape. Although this time I was talking across 
a 28-year gap I felt very much that I had reentered the original 1978 “space” of the work, 
which from a therapeutic perspective was also proximate to the time that my wife Vicky 
and I were married.
Figure 41.2   In Two Minds , video installation, Serpentine Gallery, London, April 1978 
(photo: Steve James)
Figure 41.3   Kevin Atherton,  In Two Minds—Past Version, 1978–2006 , The Studio Sessions, 
2009 San Francisco Museum of Modern Art installation view (photo: Ian 
Reeves, courtesy SFMOMA). T wo-channel video installation with sound, 
25.00; dimensions variable; courtesy the artist (© Kevin Atherton)
512
K. ATHERTONIt was within this potent period of deeply felt emotions regarding loss and mortality 
that in 2006, with an acute awareness of the obligation to sustain the original concep -
tual rigor in relation to video art as a radical practice, I also began to perform live again 
with the original Serpentine installation question tape.3
On first performing the new version of In Two Minds , I became instantly aware of the 
destabilizing effect that I was having through the mixing of past and present in a live situ -
ation.4 As I, as the performer, enter the frame of the video projection, the synchronized 
nature of the relationship between my recorded self and my live self, as we begin to move 
in the same space, creates a visually engaging mirror effect, which functions well within 
the performance in gaining the audience’s initial attention. The contrast in appearance 
between my present and my previous self, once the audience realizes that it is the same 
person in both, is then amplified when the conversation between the younger and older 
man deepens. At this point, the disorientation of the piece is experienced. However, as 
the work progresses there are as likely to be almost as many misconnects as there are con -
nections in our joint conversation, but this only endorses the verisimilitude of the perfor -
mance as being like a real conversation where the participants frequently talk over or 
misunderstand one another. The audience members become sufficiently distant witnesses 
from these social faux pas to be able to enjoy them for their comic effect.
When compared over time, the recorded questions on the original tape of course 
remain fixed, the same as they were in 1978. If, however, we compare the difference 
between my answers during the first time around with my present-day answers, we get a 
sense of the work becoming much more layered over time as it shifts away from its self-
referential formalist precepts of the Seventies. My live self, fashioned by life events and 
informed by the intervening debates that have shaped contemporary fine art, is now able 
to steer the recorded questions in new directions. By doing so, my younger self is cast in 
a different light.
The first question on the videotape recorded in 1978 is: “Okay, I’ve got some ques -
tions I’d like to ask, the first one is, why isn’t there anything on the walls or on the floor? 
Can you answer that?” Originally recorded an hour or so afterwards, the young and 
rather defensive me in the 1978 Serpentine Gallery tape answers: “Quite simply, I’m not 
a painter and I’m not a sculptor, I’m about this, this is what there is. Why should there 
be things on the wall?”
In 2011, as a 60-year-old, and a far more relaxed performer, live at Circa Projects in 
Newcastle upon Tyne ( Figure 41.4 ), I reply: “Well, there are things on the wall and on 
the floor, we’re in an exhibition called ‘Seeing in the Dark’ in Newcastle so you needn’t 
really worry about that.”5
Because of an awareness of the situation shared with the audience as the performance 
unfurls, as the performer, I’m able to collude with them against my recorded self. In this 
manner, as the dialog develops, I cultivate the conspiratorial nature of the relationship 
with the audience throughout the performance, as together we join sides in highlighting 
the shortcomings of the younger interviewer. The following transcription of the live 
performance in Newcastle exemplifies this:
Question:   “You’ve made this, this time around, you’ve made it an installation and 
you’ve lost the biggest thing of all, you’ve lost a live audience. Is that 
a problem?”
Answer:   “No, I have a live audience back here now in Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Thirty-three years later. So play it to this audience then—if you can?”
513
IN TWO MINDSQ: “Because you’ve got to get that lift somewhere.”
A: “Well, we will.”
Q: “You’ve got to pull it off.”
A: “Well, let’s do it then.”
Q: “Do you think you can do it?”
A: “Let’s do it.”
Proceeding in this reflexive manner, because of the nature of the live answers, the work 
begins to reflect upon itself over time in a way that is impossible for the original tape on 
its own. The following section of the same performance at Circa Projects in Newcastle 
shows how a question about time asked in 1978 is seemingly fixed in the time of its 
recording in the 1970s. When conscripted into the performance in 2011 the same ques -
tion becomes a meditation on the passing of time, which significantly is now happening 
over time:
Answer:   “ . . . but the piece has changed. It was about the parameters of video 
art, now.”
Question:  “But that’s not directly.”
A:  “It was and now something else has happened called life and there’s a 
thirty-three year gap between you and me. So it begins to talk about 
other stuff, more interesting stuff like premature hair loss.”
Q: “But you don’t know, you don’t know.”
A: “I do know, you don’t know.”
Q: “Because you’re not in the same time and space as they are.”
A:  “No, no, you’re not here in the same time and space as we are—that’s 
the problem and we know it. You don’t even know that I’m asking this!”
Figure 41.4   In Two Minds —Past Version , video performance, Circa Projects, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, 2011 (photo: Adam Philips)
514
K. ATHERTONHere the unifying conspiracy between the audience and myself as the live performer 
deepens and our union is consummated through my use of the word “we” rather than 
“I.” My self as a survivor into the present moment reneges on my former self in a 
peculiar voice-throwing exercise that projects my voice backward and forward 
through time reminiscent of the act of ventriloquism. The live me manipulates the 
situation as it occurs while the recorded me has no option but to stick to the script.
The audience laughs nervously suspecting that it’s only a matter of time before the 
tables are turned and my recorded self jokes at the expense of my live self. Stephen 
Feeke, in an illuminating catalogue article, reveals this process when he writes:
The act of ventriloquism can be a process of liberation, since the dummy can 
take the blame for whatever the performer says. Moreover, a performance is 
more than simply a matter of suspending disbelief. Recent analysis suggests a 
deeper significance: that ventriloquism as a social phenomenon is confessional 
and that the act that we witness is a conversation between the ventriloquist and 
their alter ego.6
Jacqui McIntosh also picks up the theme of the alter ego specifically in relation to In 
Two Minds  in her 2007 review in Magill Magazine  when she says:
He is [in the original footage] like the provocative young student questioning 
everything in the world whilst here, he is the relaxed very mature teacher. The 
result is a fantastically humorous work, which on the surface deals with very 
abstract questions about the nature of the work and performance, but which 
ultimately becomes a revealing portrait of Atherton himself.7
The idea of repetition comes under scrutiny in revealing ways when thinking about In Two 
Minds . Undoubtedly there is a repetition in the playing of the original 1978 question tape, 
which; even when issues of equipment legacy8 are taken into account, always remains 
basically the same. However, it is the “open,” or “incomplete,” nature of the video record -
ing itself that is crucial in permitting a “reentering” of the work rather than a straightfor -
ward repetition of it. In making the original installation version for the Serpentine it is 
once again worth being reminded that at that time I had no intention of repeating the 
work beyond that occasion. Likewise, the gaps that were left in the original Serpentine 
recording were intended to be filled by recorded answers, which; although argumentative 
in tone and radical in content, can now be regarded as the “correct” or matching answers. 
The openness of the work resides in the persistence, not as one might first think, of the 
original questions, but in the original silences that continue to give the illusion of listening 
whenever the work is played or performed. Clearly related to Samuel Beckett’s Krapp’s Last 
Tape9 my Seventies silences differ from Beckett’s pauses primarily because they puncture 
not just the performance, but real life. The recorded silences are crucial in In Two Minds  
because they permit a reentering; and with the audience’s tacit involvement, a remaking, 
of the original work rather than simply a restaging of it.
In the conclusion to her doctoral thesis in Irish art history, Margaret O’Brien articu -
lates this continually changing scenario when she writes:
Undoubtedly, the most influential factor in the radical transformation of mean -
ing of In Two Minds  is the lifetime it spans and from the voyeuristic position of 
515
IN TWO MINDSthe audience, glimpses of Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Grey  emerge fleet -
ingly. The repeat aspect of the live performance is a mechanism that facilitates 
the entry of immense personal and contextual changes into the work. Not only 
do the circumstances of receivership change with the condition of the repeat 
performance, but with each performance the work continues to be made, and 
far beyond the context of its origination. In this capacity, In Two Minds  cannot 
be compared to an object based artwork that is reviewed or reconsidered outside 
the context of its making. Although the conditions of receivership and the 
context for viewing may alter for a painting or sculpture, the making of the 
work ceases at a particular moment and subsequently the materials remain con -
stant. This is not the case with In Two Minds , in which the material is Atherton, 
the conditions of making and the contexts of receivership remain variable, 
endorsing mutability in a subjective interpretation of the work.10
While happy to have reconnected with my former self in In Two Minds , I’m even  
happier, that in true Wildean fashion, and for three decades, I literally kept the original 
videotapes in the attic. Conscious now of the growing gap between the time of the 1970s 
recording and the present time, the trick I’m realizing is to keep them both spinning in 
the air together.
Notes
1 All erased shortly afterwards by being recorded over. At the time this was one of the great things about 
video; as opposed to film, you could use the same tape again and again.
2 As opposed to “restaging,” which in its attempt to remain faithful to the original has a different aim.
3 I had occasionally performed with the Serpentine question tape in the early Eighties in order to demon -
strate the original work within a lecture context.
4 Described by Sonny Hayes, a professional illusionist friend, as: “Juggling with time.”
5 Kevin Atherton, In Two Minds  (excerpt), performed at Circa Projects, Newcastle upon Tyne, 2011, 
Vimeo video, 8:21, http://vimeo.com/31444775.
6 Stephen Feeke and Jon Wood, “Introduction,” With Hidden Noise—Sculpture, Video and Ventriloquism , 
exhibition and catalogue (Leeds, UK: Henry Moore Foundation, 2004), 9.
7 Jacqui McIntosh, “Images in Motion,” Magill Magazine  (February 2007): 48.
8 Made in 1978, a decade before the advent of easily accessible video projectors, the recorded “question 
tape” was originally always played on a video monitor, which in those days was as likely to be as deep as 
it was wide, now I’m able to perform with a life-size (or even larger) projected version of myself which 
greatly alters the piece.
9 I saw Beckett’s That Time  at the Royal Court in 1976 but didn’t see Krapp’s Last Tape  (1958) until 2009.
10 Margaret O’Brien, “Repetition: A Semiotic Mechanism of Destabilization in Art—A Study of In Two 
Minds  by Kevin Atherton and Box (abhareturnabout) by James Coleman, Dublin,” (MPhil thesis, Trinity 
College Dublin, 2011), 81.
Bibliography
Atherton, Kevin. In Two Minds  (excerpt). Performed at Circa Projects, Newcastle upon Tyne, 2011. 
Vimeo video, 8:21. http://vimeo.com/31444775 (accessed August 21, 2014).
Feeke, Stephen, and Jon Wood. “Introduction.” With Hidden Noise—Sculpture, Video and Ventriloquism . 
Exhibition and catalogue. Leeds, UK: Henry Moore Foundation, 2004.
McIntosh, Jacqui. “Images in Motion.” Magill Magazine  (February 2007) Dublin.
O’Brien, Margaret. “Repetition: A Semiotic Mechanism of Destabilization in Art—A Study of In Two 
Minds  by Kevin Atherton and Box (abhareturnabout) by James Coleman, Dublin.” MPhil thesis, 
Trinity College Dublin, 2011.
516INDEX
Abruzzese, Alberto 72
acknowledgement 247, 248–249, 251, 255, 450
Acland, Charles 105
activism 8, 11, 62, 333–345, 377–378, 382; 
critical remix 217, 220, 221; fan 402–403; 
locative media 366–369, 370; Situationist 
International 386–387, 389; see also  politics
Adbusters 316, 336, 391, 505
adbusting 340
Adema, Janneke 7, 258–269
Adobe 140; see also  After Effects ; Photoshop
Adorno, Theodor 117, 149, 150, 435
advertising 167, 220, 327, 343
aesthetics 5–6, 195, 228, 435; of interaction 432; 
postmodernism 171; survey data 237, 238
Afrika Bambaataa 86, 204
Afrofuturism 205, 212
After Effects 135, 137–138, 151, 161, 393, 
418–419, 474
Agamben, Giorgio 267n51
age 230–240, 241–242
agency 262, 397, 400–401, 421
Air Pirates 444
Allen, Harry 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 91
allusions 209–210
Alÿs, Francis 367
amateur/professional binary 108, 354
Amazon 61, 139, 141, 146, 329, 358, 428
ambiguity 227, 228
AMC 461
Amen Break  10, 444–452
American Express 343
Amerika, Mark 7–8, 262–263, 264, 266n7 , 
310–319
analog media 211, 297–298
Anderson, Chris 61
Andrews, Danny 458
Angeloro, Dan 109
anime music videos (AMV) 144, 288, 291, 461
Anonymous 254
Another Sunday  289–291
antidisciplinary approach 316Aphex T win 138
Apóstol, Alexander 176n3
apparatuses 263, 264
Apple 61, 358, 365, 474
appropriation 29, 100, 101, 414, 444; art 27, 31; 
framework of culture 120, 123; inherent to 
creativity 461; legal rulings 457; RE/Mixed 
Media Festival 411–412
Arab Spring 9, 11, 62, 350, 471, 473–474
Arato, Andrew 117, 119
Aravena, Claudia 175n2
architecture 145, 146, 194
Arduino 435
Arellano, Manuel 181, 182–183
Arewa, O. B. 57
Armstrong, Kate 402, 406n48
art 10, 26, 109, 151, 194–195, 200, 429, 430; 
appropriation 27, 31, 414; authenticity 211; 
authorship 99–100; avant-garde 49, 55, 
124–126; Casta Grandmaster Remix 180–184; 
combinatoriality 31–32; D’Alessandro’s work 
461–462; data in 361–363; digital media 192, 
197; framework of culture 123; immaterality 
201; Impressionism 179–180; landscape 318; 
locative media 360–361, 369–370; materiality 
192, 193; mechanical reproduction 206; 
montage 55, 56; myth of originality 77–78; 
NAMAland  363–369, 370; net art 429; 
novelty 52n43 ; performance art 11, 464–466, 
509–515; reinterpretations 426–427; remix 
as 354; RE/Mixed Media Festival 411–412, 
415–422; Situationist International 390; 
transmedia narrative 316; vernacular 
discourses 348; video art in Latin America 
166–178; Williams on 117
artificial scarcity 8, 324, 325, 328, 330
ASCII files 147–148
Assange, Julian 343
assemblages 24, 49, 59
Atherton, Kevin 11, 509–515
The Atlantic  353
Attali, Jacques 108, 259
517
INDEXAufderheide, Patricia 7, 270–282
augmented reality (AR) 359, 362, 363, 365, 
367–368, 370
Australia 272
authenticity 6, 206, 210, 212, 231–232
author-function 186, 200–201
authority 70–71, 96, 101
authorship 4, 7, 57–58, 96–103, 219, 296–297, 
325; books 263; definition of 456; digital 
media 197; Flusser on 70–71; intermedia 
195; joint 428; mashups 305–306, 307–308; 
misrecognitions about 33; Navas on 261; 
new authors 457–458; originality 78; 
reinterpretations 426; relationship with 
readers 185–186; survey data 232–233; user-
generated content 457
author/work model 296
automation 70, 74, 75, 141
avant-garde 49, 55, 77, 109, 117, 124–126, 127; 
do-it-yourself 74; Latin America 166; Russian 
film 59; Situationist International 387
aXXo 63
Azor, Hurby 301, 304
Bakhtin, Mikhail 4, 16, 21–22, 27, 406n46
Baldessari, John 458
Baldwin, Craig 505
Balzac, Honoré de 97–98
Banana Remix 184–187, 190
Band Aid 472
Bangalter, Thomas 30
bank bailouts 500, 501
Barad, Karen 259–260, 261, 262, 263, 266n3
Bard, Perry 417–418
Barnes & Noble 141
Barthes, Roland 34n4 , 117, 137, 412; authorship 
4, 97–98, 99, 100, 185–186, 297, 307–308; 
food 184
Baudrillard, Jean 450
Bauwens, Michel 252
Baym, Nancy K. 284
Be Kind Rewind  157, 161
Beastie Boys 84, 298
The Beatles 30, 94, 377
Beckett, Samuel 514
Bell, David 284
Benjamin, Walter 204, 205, 206, 209, 210, 211, 
387
Benkler, Yochai 227, 420–421
Bennett, Andrew 98
Bentham, Jeremy 252
Berger, Jon 316Bergvall, Caroline 403
Berman, Anthony 87, 91
Bernstein, Michèle 400
Berry, David 291–292
Beuys, Joseph 429
Bhabha, Homi K. 186, 347
Biederman, Charles J. 458
Big Brother Mexico 170–171
BigPicture 141
Billboard Liberation Front 336
Birk, Mette 7, 246–257
BitTorrent 62–63
Bjork 93
Black, Matt 87, 88, 93
blackness 6, 185, 186, 187, 189–190
Blade Runner  189, 206
Blair, Tony 378
Blast Theory 361, 371n20
blogs 140, 141, 144, 401–402; academic 406n44 ; 
blogosphere 61, 401, 405n38 ; Greenpeace 
339–340; hybridity 348; Queer Carrie  353; 
“spreadability” 351
Bloodgood, Elizabeth 380, 381, 382n1
blues music 28
Boing Boing 504–505
The Bomb Squad 298
books 7, 263–264, 265–266
Boon, Marcus 228, 242
Booth, Paul 219
borrowing 56–57, 411, 450
Borschke, Margie 4, 50n3 , 104–115
Both Sides Now  287
Bourdieu, Pierre 17
Boyce, Bryan 506
boyd, danah 455
Boym, Svetlana 209
Brazil 185, 186
bricolage 74–75, 80n34 , 109, 155, 193–194, 200, 
334, 340
Brokeback Mountain  160
Brown, James 30, 85, 86–87, 303, 304
Brucker-Cohen, Jonah 10, 432–443
Bruns, Axel 227
Buchloh, Benjamin 124–125, 126
Buenos Aires 138
BumpList  435–438
Bürger, Peter 124, 126
Burgess, Jean 376
Burke, Kenneth 49
Burke, Seán 100, 297
Burkeman, Oliver 378
Burkholder, Peter 56–57
518
INDEXBurning Man festival 254
burrough, xtine 1–12, 453–460
Burroughs, William 56, 206, 400
Bush, George W . 11, 171, 172–173, 174, 272, 
375, 378–382, 428, 430, 495, 501, 506
Bush, Vannevar 311
Bush v. the Zombies  272
Busse, Kristina 261
Butler, Judith 481, 485
Cabrera, Miguel 182–183
Cale, John 301
Callahan, John 374, 378, 379–380, 382
Callanan, Martin John 428
CalTV 374, 375, 381
Cameron, David 272
Campanelli, Vito 4, 68–82, 228
Campbell, George 49
Can I Get an Amen?  445–447
Canada 271–272
Cantwell, Mark 273–274
capital 118, 119, 127, 327
capitalism 69, 101, 104, 108, 117, 326, 402; 
anticapitalist ideology 324, 325; cognitive 
328; critiques of 166, 167; European 
modernity 118; framework of culture 
129; McDonald’s 170; resistance to 109; 
Situationist International opposition to 386, 
387, 388
Carnes, Seth Indigo 416, 417
Carr, Nicholas 401
cartoons 11, 503–505
Casta Grandmaster Remix 180–184, 190
Castells, Manuel 367, 441
Castro, Fidel 166, 173–175
ccMixter 58
censorship 271, 505
Cepeda, Raquel 93
Certeau, Michel de 253, 254, 255, 393, 397, 
400–401, 402, 405n29
chamber music 70
Chambers, Iain 206
Chanbonpin, Kim D. 228
Cheliotis, G. 58
Chen, Katherine 254
Cheney, Dick 172, 272–273
China 229
Chomsky, Noam 23, 31, 36n39 , 119
choragraphy 317
Christopher, Roy 6, 204–216
Chtcheglov, Ivan 387
Chuang, Ian 456Chuck D 83, 85–94
Chumbawumba 472
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong 440
Church, Scott H. 4, 43–53, 228
Cinepolis  166, 170–171
Cirio, Paolo 329, 369, 427–428
citation 450
cities 32, 138, 362
Clan PMS 403
Clifford, James 335
Clint Eastwood’s The Office  273
Clinton, George 85, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 94
Clinton, Hillary 350
“cloud” communication 139–141, 144, 147
Coad, Cher 229
Coalkitchen 302–303, 304
Coca-Cola 170, 171
cocreation 65
codes of best practices 276–279
cognisphere 398
Colbert, Stephen 475
Cold War 138
Coldcut 87, 137
collaboration 57–58, 265
collaborative remixability 144–145
collage 151, 193–194, 195, 262, 391; cultural 
production 458; fair use 276; film 56; 
intertextuality 200; modernism 109, 137; 
recombination 425
collections 142–143, 425, 428
collective intelligence 61, 398
combinatoriality 16, 23, 25, 27–32, 33
Comic-Con International 461
commentary 273–274, 278
commerciality 65, 229–230, 231, 242, 327, 330; 
see also  profiting
commodification 108, 198, 209, 210
commodity fetishism 325
commons-based peer production 104
communication 349; cloud 139–141, 144, 147; 
synchronous 57–58
Communist Manifesto  11, 503, 504
compensation 65, 93, 308
compilation videos 159–160, 163n46
composition 15, 108, 296, 307, 308
computers 432–433, 438, 440, 441
configurability 6–7, 228, 229–240, 242
connectedness 59
connectivity 149
Conner, Bruce 56, 414–415
consumption 108, 110, 128, 198, 199, 219
contagion 76
519
INDEXContent ID system 255, 270, 480, 483, 484–485
Conti, Olivia 8–9, 346–357
continuity 235–236
convergence 8, 227, 266n9 , 316, 335, 398, 401
conversations 22
Coppa, Francesca 261, 271, 287, 292
copy and paste 78–79, 104; see also  cut/copy/
paste
copying 110, 218, 228, 259–260, 444–445; 
digital networks 468; ethics 229; fair use 279; 
right to copy 242; source acknowledgement 
450
copyleft 2, 312, 391, 449, 450
copyright 2, 6, 10, 11, 64, 270–282, 468–469; 
authority of copyright holders 461; author/
work model 296; Baldwin’s remix videos 
505; calls for reform 456; defenders of 411; 
disputing violations 484–485; disruption of 
72, 119; DMCA violations 462, 466–468; 
ethics 228, 229–230, 246; A Fair(y) Use 
Tale 487, 491–493; journals 489; Lessig on 
104–105, 107; Let’s Go Crazy #1  454–455; 
maximalist policy 242; misrecognitions 
about authorship 33; musical borrowing 57; 
plagiarism linked to infringement 444–445, 
449, 450n1 ; publishers 8; RE/Mixed Media 
Festival 412, 417; sampling 83–84, 89–91, 
92, 94, 298; threats to amateur practice 108; 
US law 422; user-generated content 456–458; 
YouTube 7, 327, 415, 480, 483, 484–485; see 
also fair use
Cornell, Joseph 420
corporations 8, 127–128, 218, 254–255, 262, 
323; adbusting 340; artificial scarcity 325; 
control by 126; critiques of 167; money and 
power 221; power of copyright 469
Couchot, Edmond 196
Courtés, Joseph 337
Cox, David 505
Coyne, Richard 369–370
Crank the Web  439–440
creation 69, 71, 197
Creative Commons 1, 2, 11, 148, 228, 277, 279, 
312
“creative lie” 495
creativity 4, 7, 104, 255, 413, 461; amateur 
108; attitudes towards 247–248, 249; 
classical imitative practices 45; cultures of 
106; fair use 279; Flusser on 71; free culture 
324; introspection-based 57; Navas on 261; 
participatory 105; sampling 91, 95; street art 
32; user-generated content 456critical commentary 273–274, 278
critical digital intertextuality 335, 340
critical remix 6, 11, 217, 218, 219–220, 221, 
328–329, 471, 474
Critical Remix Video Wall 474, 476
Crowd Control  489, 490
Csiscery-Ronay, Istvan 205
Cuevas, Ximena 166–167, 169–171, 173, 175, 
176n18
cult value 209, 211
cultural artifacts 4, 15, 17, 24, 33, 54, 98; 
Derrida on 96, 99; digital reproduction of 205; 
hip hop music 26; intersubjectivity 18; Lessig 
on 106; mediated memories 212; sharing of 
414; symbolic relations 20
cultural commons 415
cultural processes 15
cultural production 5, 43, 54, 59–61, 76, 102, 
326, 330; collage and juxtaposition 458; 
framework of culture 128, 129; free culture 
324; paradox of 124; value capture 327; 
vernacular discourses 348
cultural syncretism 347
culture 4–5, 16, 116–124, 420–421; Adorno on 
435; “culture of remix” 71, 72–74; definitions 
of 33, 116–117; digitalization of 68, 73; 
framework of 116, 120–124, 125, 128–129; 
modularity 151; propertization of 242; 
semiotic theory of 334–335
culture industry 149–150, 325, 402, 412, 421
culture jamming 348, 392, 505–506
curators 399
cut and paste 173, 174, 314, 315
cut/copy/paste 104, 183, 258, 259; see also  copy 
and paste
cutting 7, 206, 258–259, 260–261, 262, 263, 
265–266
cut-up techniques 56
cyberpunk 204, 206–208, 211–212
Da Silva, Cicero Inacio 4, 96–103
Daft Punk 30–31, 37n61
Daily Kos 273, 274
The Daily Show  20
D’Alessandro, Desiree 10–11, 416, 461–470
Dali, Salvador 420
dance music 106–107
dancing baby 453
Danger Mouse 94
Daniel, Drew 89, 93, 94, 210
The Dark Knight  160, 161, 493
Darknet 278
520
INDEXdata art 361–363
data scraping 329, 330, 359, 361, 369
databases 362, 364, 365, 366
Davies, Ray 301
Davis, Miles 27–29
Dawkins, Richard 398, 453
De La Soul 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93
Dean, Jodi 328
Deane, Shelley 380, 381, 382n1
de-black-boxing 15, 16, 17, 33
Debord, Guy 56, 211, 386, 387, 388, 390, 
395n27
deception 495
Decherny, Peter 271
deconstruction 72
“deep remixability” 34n3 , 74, 161, 419, 423n25
Degas, Edgar 179
DeLanda, Manuel 59
Deleuze, Gilles 263, 400, 401, 496
Demers, Joanna 46, 94
Denmark 251
Derieux, Florence 399
Derrida, Jacques 4, 34n4 , 96–97, 99–100, 102, 
209, 260
Descartes, René 57
design 145, 146, 149
détournement  9, 56, 348, 387, 388, 389–390, 
391–394, 400, 412
Deutsche, Rosalyn 362
Dewaele, Stephen and David 304–307
dialog 69, 75, 78
dialogical remixes 79
dialogism 16, 19, 21–23, 24, 27, 33; Kristeva 
406n46 ; music 29; visual art 31, 32, 193
Dick, Kirby 277
Digg 141
digital culture 4, 104, 136
digital media 6, 8, 43, 71, 73–74, 195–197, 
211, 425; activism 333, 340; authorship 296, 
297; composition 307; copying 468; global 
expansion of 77; immaterality 192–193, 
201; polymaths 398; postproduction 317; 
standardization 336; vidding 288; see also  
Internet ; software ; technology
Digital Millenium Copyright Act (DMCA) 271, 
454, 462, 466–468
digital reproduction 205, 206, 210
digital rights management systems 330
disco 110, 118, 137
discourse 22, 259, 260, 325–326; political 336; 
vernacular 346, 347–349, 351, 353–355; 
“webs of structured discourse” 352discrete infinity 23
discursive remixes 78–79
discursive society 74
Displaced  289
dispositifs  263
distortion 427
DJ Abilities 85, 86
DJ Baauer 323
DJ Kool Herc 86
DJ Le Clown 474
DJ Spooky 91, 262
DJ Vadim 86, 93
DJs 4, 44, 102, 156, 298, 325; history of remix 
106–107; Jamaican 70, 77; marginalization 
109; sampling 83–95
“DJs of Thought” 397, 399, 404
documentaries 62, 127–128, 277
The Documentary’s New Politics  489–491
do-it-yourself (DIY) 1, 74, 335, 380, 435; movie 
trailers 155, 159; YouTube 376, 381
Don Loves Roger  11, 483, 484, 485
Donaldson, Michael 278
“do-ocracy” 246–247, 254
Dorado, Josephine 418
Double Dee 419
“Dove Onslaughter” campaign 340–342
Downfall/Hitler Reacts  276
Dramatic Chipmunk  276
Drew, Jesse 11, 503–508
dub 77, 118
Dublin 363–369
Duchamp, Marcel 124, 315, 317, 428
Dunn, Lloyd 85
Durkheim, Émile 77
Dusi, Nicola Maria 5, 154–165, 334–335
Dussel, Enrique 118–119, 127
The Dust Brothers 298
Dybwad, Barb 144–145
Dylan, Bob 377
Eagleton, Terry 116–118, 119
Eco, Umberto  34n4 , 52n43 , 79, 195
economic value 327–328
The Economist  447–450
economy 326–327
Edwards, Richard L. 335
Egoyan, Atom 318
8½ 156
Eisenstein, Sergei 55, 137, 220, 425, 430n1 , 
430n2
electracy 317
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) 454
521
INDEXelectronic journals 489, 491
Electronic Superhighway  474, 475
Elephants Dream  148
Eliot, T. S. 57, 116
El-P 45, 87, 88, 92, 94
email lists 435–438
Emergency Broadcast Network (EBN) 474, 506
EMI 94
Eminem 156
empowerment 104, 107–108
encyclopedia 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30
end-user license agreements (EULAs) 456, 458
Engels, Friedrich 11, 503
Englebardt, Doug 139
Enlightenment 120
entertainment 337
environmentalism 339, 341
Epstein 426
Erickson, Emily 10, 453–460
Escobar, Pablo 168
Eshun, Kodwo 205
ethics 6–8, 50, 227–245, 414–415; sampling 
92–93; survey data 229–240, 241, 242; video 
remix practice 246–257
Ethiopia 472
ethnomusicology 377
Europe: European modernity 118–119; open 
data initiatives 359
evolution 72
Evolution of Dance  274–275
exchange value 209, 211, 328
extended remix 180, 182, 348
Facebook 60, 128, 136, 329, 428; Arab Spring 
62; data sets 369; hybridity 348; Occupy/
Band Aid Mashup  476; privacy concerns 358; 
standardization 393; updates 455
Faden, Eric S. 11, 487–494
fair use 2, 33, 251, 270–282, 417, 483; codes of 
best practices 276–279; A Fair(y) Use Tale  11, 
491–493; four-part investigation 458; journals 
489–491; Lessig on 107; Let’s Go Crazy #1  
454–455, 456; right to 485; takedown notices 
455, 476; university policies 467, 468
A Fair(y) Use Tale  11, 487–494
Fairey, Shepard 31, 32
Falconer, Rachel 9, 397–408
Falzone, Anthony 493
fan culture 63–64, 156–157, 293, 393, 402–403; 
see also  online communities
fan fiction 159, 229, 271, 402–403, 406n51
Fanlore 291Federman, Raymond 313–314
feed readers 140, 143, 151; see also  RSS feeds
Feeke, Stephen 514
femininity 184
feminism 11, 261–262, 350, 353, 402–403, 480, 
481–482, 483; see also  gender ; women
Ferguson, Kirby 129n17 , 461
Fernández, Pedro 170
Ferrell, Will 462, 464
file sharing 62, 63, 65, 83, 422, 455, 466, 468
film 56, 59, 62; documentaries 62, 277; fair use 
277; A Fair(y) Use Tale  487–494; “foreign 
films” 316–317, 318–319; Manovich on 
392; movie trailers 5, 154–165; Pirates of the 
Caribbean  187–190; sci-fi 212; Situationist 
International 389; “stylized” aesthetic 
164n60 ; see also  video
Flash 147
Fleetwood Mac 30
Flickr 60, 62, 135–136, 141, 148, 369, 428
Floch, Jean Marie 334
Flusser, Vilém 4, 68–71, 73, 74–76, 78–79, 
80n37, 199
Fong, Kandy 284, 287
Foster, Hal 124–125, 126, 169
Foucault, Michel 7, 34n4 , 412; apparatus 
concept 259, 263; authorship 4, 99, 100, 
185–186, 297, 308; panopticism 246, 253, 
255, 401
Foursquare 369
Fox News: Oil and Adventure in the Arctic!  273, 
274
fragmentation 109–110, 167, 168, 173, 179
France 386–387, 388, 390
franchising 150
Frankenstein  189
Frankfurt School 117
free culture 11, 312, 324, 326, 330, 421
Free Software Foundation (FSF) 292
free software movement 64, 312, 391
free speech 105, 106, 107, 271
Free Universal Construction Kit  329
freedom 2, 69–70, 75–76, 198
freedom of expression 6, 221, 401
Freud, Sigmund 60, 99
Freund, Katharina 7, 283–295
Friedman, Ted 105–106
Friedman, Thomas 401
Fuentes, Graciela 166–167, 172–173, 175, 
177n22
Funkadelic 85, 89
The Future Laboratory 138
522
INDEXGallagher, Owen 1–12, 471–479
Galton, Francis 186
Game Grrlz 403
games 151, 229, 403, 418
The Gang’s All Here  184
Ganz, Rebecca 458
Garcia, Bobbito 87, 89
Garfield, Dean 91, 94, 95
Gaye, Marvin 15, 461, 469n1
Gaylor, Brett 220
Geldof, Bob 375, 377, 378, 382, 472
gender 160, 220, 481, 485; fan activism 402–
403; survey data on ethics 230–241; vidding 
292; see also  feminism ; women
Generation Like  128
generativity 16–17, 20, 22, 24, 29, 31, 33
Genette, Gérard 154
genre remixes 159–160
genres 15, 25, 26, 33, 193
geotagging 359, 361
Gibson, William 205, 206, 209, 212
gift economy 63–64, 312, 415
Gilliam, Angela and Onik’a 185
Gillis, Gregg 44, 48–50, 52n48 , 299
Girard, Michael 453
Girl Talk 44, 46, 48–50, 52n48,  105, 299
Glee 307, 473
Global Positioning System (GPS) 358, 359–361
globalization 68–69, 118, 149, 392
Goldsmith, Kenneth 400, 403–404
Good Copy, Bad Copy  62
Google 128, 141, 152n13 , 428, 430, 441; 
Content ID system 270; fair use 271, 279; 
“Harlem Shake” 323; privacy concerns 358; 
web applications 136
Google Adsense 327
Google Maps 358–359, 369
Google News 141
Google Reader 140, 143–144
Google+ 128, 369
Gordon, Fresh 301, 304
Grainge, Paul 209
Grand Upright Music Ltd 298, 299
Grandmaster Flash 86, 180, 190n4 , 298
Granovetter, Mark 60
granularity 59
Green, Joshua 376
Green, Kat 416
Greenberg, Clement 127
Greenpeace 333, 337–342
Greimas, Algirdas Julien 337
Grimmelmann, James 228Grusin, Richard 97
Guattari, Felix 400, 401
guerrilla campaigns 336, 337, 338, 341, 343, 388
Gulf War 506
Gulyas, Paul 274
Gun Fight  277
Gunn, Joshua 208
Guo, Lei 347–348, 352
Guthrie, Woody 377
Gutiérrez, Laura 170
Gysin, Brion 56
Haacke, Hans 361–362, 364
hackers 228, 324, 329, 391, 427–428
hactivism 329
Hall, Gary 265
Hamelink, Cees J. 199
Hancock, Herbie 21
Haraway, Donna 266n3 , 398
“Harlem Shake” 323
Harris, Jonathan 141
Harrison, George 90
Harrison, Nate 10, 444–452
Hatori, Miho 87, 89
Hausman, Michael 91, 92, 94
Hausmann, Raoul 137
Hayles, N. Katherine 167, 398
Heavenly Creatures  172–173, 177n22
Hedges, Chris 500
Hegemann, Helene 411, 412
Helping Johnny Remember  418–419
Heusch, Luc de 389
Heymann, Laura 457–458
Higgins, Dick 195
high culture 119, 446
hip hop music 26, 83, 110, 118, 156, 204–216, 
298; interviews with DJs 4, 84, 85–95; 
mashups 93; RE/Mixed Media Festival 422
historical avant-garde 124–126
hive mind 398
Höch, Hannah 137, 400
Holly Bee Music 446
Hollywood 62, 63, 149–150, 159, 160, 163n46, 
220
Homem-Christo, Guy-Manuel de 30
Horkheimer, Max 117, 149
Horwatt, Eli 348, 354
Hosler, Mark 85, 94
house music 118, 122–123
Howard, Robert Glenn 348, 352
HTML 147, 151, 311
Hung, Kenneth Tin-Kin 416, 417
523
INDEXHuyssen, Andreas 205
hybridity 3–4, 27; street art 32; vernacular 
discourses 347–348, 354, 355
hybridization 15, 68, 78, 198, 343; “deep 
remixability” 74; digital media 196; movie 
trailers 162; mulatta body 187; semiotic 
theory of culture 334
Hyde, Lewis 415
hypermedia 196
hyper-reading 167
hypertext 196, 297, 311
I Am Not Moving  350
I Wanted to See All of the News From Today  428
Ice T 499
identity 99, 100, 101, 186, 481
ideology 128, 167, 176n6, 201, 324, 330
If Dick Cheney Was Scarface  272–273
iGoogle 143–144
illustration 274–275, 278
images 31–32, 54–55, 73, 75, 196; immaterality 
192, 199; Multi-Cultural Recycler  426; 
ownership 458; video art in Latin America 
168–169, 170, 175
“Imagine This” 374–375, 378–382
imitatio  44–46, 49, 50
imitation 44–46, 76–78
immaterality 192–193, 196, 197, 199, 201, 324
Immobilité  316, 318–319
“imperial gothic” 190
importi.io 369
Impressionism 179–180
improvisation 28, 32
In Two Minds  11, 509–515
incidental use 275–276, 278
information 69, 70, 71, 73, 75–76, 195; 
atomization of 140, 147; collaborative 
remixability 144–145; consumption of 198, 
199; dialogical remixes 79; digital media 196, 
197; recirculation 428–430; “redirectors” of 
425, 430
information society 70, 71, 79
innovation 52n43 , 76–77, 79, 120, 228, 
232–233, 328
intellectual property 2, 229, 242, 312, 461; 
acts of communication 16; artificial scarcity 
324; ethical video remix practice 246; 
harmonization of laws 243; music 10; see also  
copyright
interdisciplinarity 2, 3, 10, 12, 16; art 192; 
polymaths 397, 399
interfaces 10, 140–141, 144, 148, 195, 432–443intermedia 195, 196
intermediality 22, 27
Internet 56, 311, 425, 441; academic writing on 
the 312; anonymity of online communities 
221; art 126; battles over intellectual property 
243; Crank the Web  439–440; détournement  
393; electronic journals 489–491; endless 
sea metaphor 428; fair use in online video 
278–279; fan communities 156–157, 402; 
knowledge production 397; legal landscape 
468; mashups 93; memes 398–399, 405n18 , 
453; movie trailers 155, 156–157; networked 
communication 127; political protest 339, 
374; political remix videos 503; power of 
distribution 505; reinterpretations 426–427; 
retailing 61–62; reterritorialization of 400; 
“spreadability” 351; web browsers 440; “webs 
of structured discourse” 352; see also  online 
communities ; social media ; Web 2.0 ; YouTube
Internet People  274, 275
interpretants 18, 19, 25–26
interpretive community 402
The Interrupters  277
intersubjectivity 18, 19, 22, 24–25, 26, 32; 
cultural artifacts 33; Remix+  27; synthesis of 
information 70; telematic society 71
intertextuality 22, 27, 160, 193, 200, 219, 337; 
art 194, 195; blogs 401; categories of critical 
202n6; critical digital 335, 340; digital media 
197; framework of culture 123; Kristeva on 
401–402, 406n46 ; metacreation 201; movie 
trailers 154
intrasemiotic translation 155, 162
introspection 57
“invariants” 161–162, 164n64
invention 44, 50, 76
iPhone 365
iPhoto 140
The Iraq Campaign  506
Iraq war 375, 376, 379, 380, 381, 382, 430
Ireland 363–364, 366, 475
iRES 317
irony 336–337
Irvine, Martin 3–4, 15–42
Isocrates 44, 45, 46–48, 51n11 , 51n28 , 51n29 , 
52n47 , 52n48
Italy 387
iTunes 141, 147, 148, 152n17
Jackendoff, Ray 23, 36n43
Jackson, Michael 30
Jackson, Peter 168, 172
524
INDEXJake Gyllenhaal Challenges the Winner of the Nobel 
Peace Prize  418, 419, 495–497
James, Steve 277
Jameson, Frederic 450
Jaszi, Peter 276, 278, 485
Jay-Z 94, 208, 498–500
jazz 21, 27–29, 32, 84, 85, 88, 415
Jenkins, Henry 155–156, 325–326, 404n9 ; 
convergence culture 227, 266n9 ; cultural 
literacy 455; cultural production 458; fan 
culture 63–64, 156, 393, 402–403; movie 
consumption 159; participatory culture 108; 
“spreadability” 351
Jezebel  353, 480
journals 310–311, 489, 491
Joyce, Don 91
JSTOR 397
Jumpcut 140
Kafai, Yasmin B. 240
kairos  46, 48, 50, 51n23
Kalnins, Karlis 360
Kaltura 140
Kaplan, Geoff 277
Karsenti, Bruno 77
Kasem, Casey 505
Katzew, Ilona 181
Keen, Andrew 401
Kelly, Kevin 398
Kember, Sarah 260–261
Kendrick, Anna 307
Kennedy, Randy 411
Kenny, Enda 475
Kerrigan, Kait 417
Key, Stephen 468
keywords 426
Kid 606 85
Kind of Blue  27–29
kinetic typography 161
King, Martin Luther Jr. 350, 500–501
kitsch culture 127
Klein, Norman M. 210
Kline, David 401
Knabb, Ken 387
Knobel, Michele 183
knowledge 26, 397; networked 399, 402, 404; 
polymaths 398, 399; sharing 61
Kopple, Barbara 277
Kreisinger, Elisa 11, 261–262, 347, 349–350, 
351–353, 416, 417, 480–486
Krieger, J. Meryl 9, 374–385
Kristeva, Julia 401–402, 406n46Kuhn, Virginia 219, 348–349, 350, 352, 353, 
354
Kuleshov, Lev 59
Kutiman 474
labor 119, 228, 236–237, 326–327
Landow, George 297
language 23, 24, 32, 98, 260, 429
Lanham, Richard 43
Lankshear, Colin 183
Lasn, Kalle 209, 210
Lasswell, Harold D. 227
Last.fm 141
Latin America 5, 166–178, 179, 186
Latour, Bruno 59, 151
lawsuits 83–84, 89–91, 270, 298, 468; Lenz 
v. Universal  453–456; sampling 94; user-
generated content 457; see also  legality
Layar 363, 365
Le Bon, Gustav 76
League of Noble Peers 62
Leduc, Martin 219, 262
Lee, Lorin 347–348, 352
Lee, Peggy 412
Lee, Will “Master” 420
Lefebvre, Henri 361
legality 230–231, 240–241, 251–252; see also  
copyright ; lawsuits
Lennon, John 9, 374, 375, 377, 378–379, 380–
381, 383n11
Lenz, Stephanie 10, 270, 275–276, 453–456, 457
Leonard, Philip 348
Lessig, Lawrence 4, 38n72 , 94, 104–109, 458; 
architecture of control 468; cyber-utopianism 
50n3 ; A Fair(y) Use Tale  493; innovation 228; 
lawsuit against YouTube 270; propertization 
of culture 242; read/write culture 106, 266n9 , 
400, 413–414, 456; remix culture 1, 11, 126–
127, 227; “War on Piracy” 455
Lethem, Jonathan 403
Let’s Go Crazy #1  275–276, 453–456, 457
Levin, Golan 329
Levine, Sherrie 414, 450
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 74, 80n34
Levy, Bruno 419
Lévy, Pierre 254
lexicon 25, 28, 29
Lialina, Olia 426
licensing 64, 65, 83–84, 279; artificial scarcity 
324; Creative Commons 148; end-user license 
agreements 456, 458; open licenses 230; user-
generated content 457
525
INDEXLicklider, Joseph 62
linguistics 16, 23
Lipstiz, George 209
literature 123, 403, 422
Live Aid 375, 377–378, 472, 476
LiveJournal 283, 284, 285–286, 289, 291–292, 
293
LiveWindow  433, 434
Living Books about Life  258, 264–265
locative media 9, 358–373
Logie, John 7, 296–309
Lombardi, Mark 361–362
Lorca, Garcia 392
The Lord of the Rings  168
Lord of the Rings Was Too Long  272–273
Lothian, Alexis 261
Lotman, Yuri 16, 22, 33, 335
Lovink, Geert 401
low culture 446
Lowdermilk, Brian 417
Ludovico, Alessandro 329, 369, 427–428
Lyons, Diran 11, 353, 418, 495–502
Machado, Arlindo 167
MacManus, Richard 147
Mad Men  11, 353, 482–484
Mad Men: Set Me Free  483, 484, 485
Madison, Michael 276
Maffesoli, Michel 72
Maker Studios 323
Malchow, H. L. 190, 191n30
Man with a Movie Camera: The Global Remake  
417–418
Manifestoon  11, 503–505, 507
manipulation practices 343, 344
Manovich, Lev 68–69, 97, 171, 376, 381, 
384n37 , 393, 412; “deep remixability” 34n3 , 
74, 161, 419, 423n25 ; modularity 73; social 
media 5, 135–153; spatial montage 474; 
“stylized” aesthetic 164n60 ; on Vertov 392
Markie, Biz 83, 90, 298
Marshall, John Paul 284, 285
Marx, Karl 11, 412, 503
masculinity 184
mashups 10–11, 139–140, 219, 325; aesthetics 
228; authorship 296–297, 307–308; 
collaborative remixability 145; framework of 
culture 123; Girl Talk 48–50; “Imagine This” 
374–375, 378–382; imitatio  45–46; locative 
media 358–359; Monster Mash Remix 189; 
movies 5, 156, 159, 160–161, 162; “No Fun/
Push It” mashup 7, 299–308; Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  11, 471–479; pastiche 276; political 
issues 8–9, 11, 375, 381; sampling 93–94; 
software 329; survey data 230–240
Mason, Matt 63
mass culture 150, 151, 210
Mass Ornament Revisited  489
mass production 149
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
277
Mastercard 343
materialism 259
McCaffery, Larry 206–207
McCain, John 11, 416, 501
McDonald, Emilie 413
McDonald’s 170, 176n18
McDonough, Thomas 360
McGarrigle, Conor 9, 358–373
McGuire, Richard 93, 94
McIntosh, Jacqui 514
McIntosh, Jonathan 346, 353, 416
McLaren, Malcolm 391
McLaughlin, Thomas 402
McLeod, Kembrew 4, 83–95
McLuhan, Marshall 60, 207, 208, 221
McNicholl, Chris 433
McQueen, Alexander 138
McSherry, Corynne 454
meaning 16, 17, 18–21, 27, 29, 110; art 31, 
32; collective meaning resources 25–26, 33; 
cultural 420–421; recursion 24; repurposing 
334; situated meaning transformations 22
mechanical reproduction 204–205, 206, 211, 
259
media: mainstream 217; mobility 136, 139; 
modularity 73, 74, 136, 148–149; new media 
ecology 135–136; producers 151n7 ; software 
136; unidirectional 70, 78, 79; see also  digital 
media
Medina, Cuauhtémoc 169
Meintjes, Louise 377
memes 77, 276, 323, 325, 398–399, 405n18 , 
453, 499
memory 6, 206, 209; collective 27; hip hop 
music 210; mediated memories 204, 212
The Merchants of Cool  127, 128
metacreation 192–193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 
200–201
Mexico 169–171, 180
Meyer, Herman 208
Mhenni, Lina Ben 62
Micha, Adela 170–171
Microsoft 139, 358
526
INDEXMiley/O’Connor Mashup: Nothing Compares to a 
Wrecking Ball  476
Miller, George 323
Miller, Paul 262
Mininova 63
Miranda, Carmen 184–187
Miranda, José A. B. de 199
misrecognition 17, 33
Mix Master Mike 93, 94
MK12 138
mobile technologies 61, 62, 159
mobility 136, 139
Moby 416–417
Mockup on Mu  505
modernism 31, 60, 109; framework of culture 
120–121; montage 55; visual 137
modernity 117, 118–119, 198
mods/modders 151, 229
modularity 73, 74, 136, 144, 145–151
Moholy-Nagy, László 55, 137
Mona Lisa  25
Monster Mash Remix 187–190
montage 151, 171, 193–194, 195, 425; 
Eisenstein on 430n1 ; film 56, 59; 
intertextuality 200; modernism 55, 60, 137; 
political remix videos 496; spatial 474
Moore, Thurston 300
moral rights 241
morality 234–235
Mosquera, Gerardo 176n12
Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA) 277, 307, 464, 505
Moulton, Tom 137
movie trailers 5, 154–165
Mr. Dibbs 90
Mr. Len 88, 92
Mr. Lif 92
Muckelbauer, John 44
Mufin 141
mulatta women 180–184, 185, 186, 187–190
Muller, Heiner 412, 413
Multi-Cultural Recycler  426
multidimensionality 219
multimedia 195, 265, 461, 488–489
Mundaca, Marie 413
Muntadas, Antoni 429
musematic 109
music 1–2, 10, 20, 118; Adorno on 435; 
amateur/professional distinction 108; Amen 
Break  10, 444–452; analog media 297–298; 
avant-garde 56; Band Aid and Live Aid 
472; beat-blending 123; borrowing 56–57; ccMixter 58; chamber music 70; collective 
meaning 26; copyright violations 458; Daft 
Punk 30–31, 37n61 ; digital reproduction 206; 
dub 77; ethnomusicology 377; file sharing 
65; fragmentation 109–110; framework of 
culture 123; Girl Talk 48–50; history of 
remix 3, 106–107; “Imagine This” 378–382; 
jazz 21, 27–29, 32, 84, 85, 88, 415; Kind of 
Blue 27–29; mashups 296; Moby 416–417; 
multi-track mixers 97, 137, 145; musematic 
109; “No Fun/Push It” mashup 299–308; oral 
history of sampling 83–95; protest 374, 375, 
377–378, 382; recommendation software 141; 
recursion 24; remixability 145; RE/Mixed 
Media Festival 419; revolution in 137; Sex 
Pistols 390–391, 412; see also  DJs; hip hop 
music ; sampling
Musicovery 141
My Boyfriend Came Back From the War  426
My_Contacts  428
MySpace 60, 135–136, 455
NAMAland  359, 363–369, 370
names 96–97, 99, 102
Nankivell, Ashleigh 418–419
narrative 109, 142–143, 194; transmedia 316, 
317
nature 69
Navas, Eduardo 1–12, 261, 266n13 , 325–326, 
334, 418; culture and remix 4–5, 116–131; 
cut/copy/paste 259; poststructuralism 190n12; 
reflexive remix 162n19 , 329, 348; sampling 
78, 186
negative commentary 273–274
Negativland 85, 91, 505
Nelson, Ted 311
neo-avant-garde 124–126
Nesheim, Elisabeth 266n9
NETescopio 426
Netflix 141
networks 60, 429; framework of culture 122, 
123; message circulation 328; network 
infrastructure 330; “network of networks” 65; 
networked knowledge production 399, 402, 
404; networked society 69, 71, 77
New York Dolls 412
News Corporation 136
news readers 140
news.ask.com 141
newspapers 142
Newspond 141
Nieuwenhuys, Constant 386
527
INDEXNike 328
99 Problems (Explicit Political Remix)  353, 
498–501
Nishime, LeiLani 189
“No Fun/Push It” mashup 299–308
Norlin, George 48, 51n11
Norton, Quinn 254
nostalgia 205, 209, 212
Novak, Marcos 392–393
novelty 45–46, 49, 52n43 , 77
Nuttall, Tom 450
NWA 92
Obama, Barack 11, 350, 381, 416, 418, 475, 
495–501
Obama Likes Spending (Project 12, 3/12)  497–498
O’Brien, Margaret 514–515
Occupy 9, 11, 325, 350, 471, 500
Occupy/Band Aid Mashup  11, 471–479
O’Dwyer, Rachel 8, 323–332
Ogilvie, Corey 347, 350, 353
Old Spice Music Music campaign 331n26
On, Josh 361–362, 363
online communities 58, 156–157, 284–285, 348, 
349, 376, 480; see also  fan culture
Ono, Kent A. 346, 347–348, 349, 351
Ono, Yoko 377, 378
open code software 426
open courseware 277
open data initiatives 359, 369, 370
open source movement 1, 50, 312
“Open Video Conference ( Step Brothers  Remix)” 
464, 465
OpenStreetMap 369
oppression 355, 481
Opus  166, 173–175
orators 45, 47, 49
O’Reilly, Tim 227
O’Reilly Emerging Technology conferences 139
Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) 456
Organization for Transformative Works (OTW) 271
originality 64, 65, 77–78, 232–233, 261, 313
Orlik, Peter B. 441
O’Sullivan, Gilbert 83, 298
otherness 21–22, 101
OverClocked (OC) 461
OWL 141
Pac Manhattan  361, 371n19
Paik, Nam June 474, 475
Pandora 141panopticism 246, 252–253, 255, 256
paradoxes 336–337
parallel architecture of meaning-making 25–26
paratexts 154
Parks, Lisa 360
Parliament 85, 89
parody 298, 427, 444, 457; fair use 272–273; 
movies and movie trailers 158, 160, 161, 
163n46, 163n48
participatory culture 70, 108, 159, 336
participatory media 104, 110, 351, 352, 484
pastiche 109, 194, 276, 347, 349–350, 450
Patiris, Phil 506
Paul, Cameron 303–304
Paul, Prince 87
peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing 62, 159, 252, 466, 
468
Peirce, Charles Sanders 4, 17–20, 21, 22, 25–26, 
34n4 , 34n12 , 35n22
“Pepper Spray Cop” meme 325
Pepsi Max 323
performance art 11, 464–466, 509–515
performativity 185, 258, 259, 264, 265
Perloff, Marjorie 403
Perniola, Mario 199
Perrone-Moisés, Leyla 202n6
The Persuaders  127
Peters, John Durham 208
Peverini, Paolo 8, 157, 159, 160–161, 333–345
Photobucket 140
photographs 31, 54–55, 60, 146, 148, 210; see 
also images
Photoshop 135, 137–138, 151, 393, 506
Picard, Rosalind 432
Picasso, Pablo 57, 137
Pink Floyd 30
Pinker, Steven 23, 36n43
piracy 63, 108, 249, 255, 270, 403, 413; fear of 
468; hegemonic definitions of 422; public 
opinion on 412; Stop Online Piracy Act 
423n30 ; “War on” 455; YouTube 480
The Pirate Bay 62, 63
Pirates of the Caribbean  187–190
Pitch Perfect  307
Place, Vanessa 403
plagiarism 249, 334, 411; copyright and 
444–445, 449, 450n1 ; public opinion on 412; 
Situationist International 390
playgiarism 313–314
Plaza, Julio 195, 200
politics 8–9, 11, 421; augmented reality 370; 
critical remix 6; political protest 9, 335–337, 
528
INDEX374–385; political remix videos 8–9, 261–262, 
337–343, 346–357, 495–502, 503–508; 
Situationist International 386–387, 388, 390; 
video art in Latin America 175; see also  activism
polymaths 9, 397, 398–400, 401, 402–403, 404
Pop, Iggy 299–300, 305
popular culture 119
Pór, Georges 61
Porcello, Thomas 376
Porter, Joshua 147
Poschardt, Ulf 137
position 361
positive commentary 274
postcolonial perspective 5–6, 117–119
posthumanism 259, 262, 263
Postman, Neil 438–439
postmodernism 31, 34n4 , 68, 109, 480–481; 
aesthetics 171; art 77; culture 119; framework 
of culture 121, 122; street art 32
postproduction 73, 161, 317
poststructuralism 17, 190n12
Poulakos, Takis 46
Pound, Ezra 310
power 99, 101, 228; developing countries 472; 
hierarchy of 469; panopticism 252–253; 
survey data 237–238, 239, 242
Prefuse 73 88, 93
Prince 455, 457
Prince, Richard 414
printing press 54–55
privacy 6, 9, 358
privatization 323, 325, 328
Processed World  505–506
production 76, 201; automation of 70, 74, 75; 
democratization of 199; free culture 324; mass 
149; see also  cultural production
Professor Griff 204
profiting 229–230, 247–248, 250, 252; see also  
commerciality
prosumers 60–61, 155, 227, 339, 400–401, 402
Protect IP Act (PIPA) 422, 423n30
Public Enemy 83–84, 86, 88–89, 91, 207, 212n2 , 
298
publishers 8, 277, 312–313, 469
publishing 258, 263–264, 310, 312–313
punk 390–391, 412
Purcell, Kristen 376–377, 381
purpose 75, 458
Qbert 86
The Queer Carrie Project  11, 349–350, 351–353, 
416, 481–482, 485queer communities 480
Queer Men  353
queer theory 11, 481, 485
QuickTime 151
Quintilian 45
quotation 29, 54, 106, 251
race 5–6, 481; Banana Remix 184–187; Casta 
Grandmaster Remix 180–184; ethnicity 
in ethics survey data 230–241, 242; legal 
apparatus 243; Pirates of the Caribbean films 
187–190
Rammellzee 204
Randall, Marilyn 96
Rapid Manufacturing 149
Rauschenberg, Robert 31–32
Ray, Man 55
Ray, Robert 488
Read, Ashley 328, 331n26
reading 167
read-only culture 38n72 , 106, 218, 413–414, 
456
read/write culture 106, 126, 218, 220, 266n9 , 
400, 413–414, 456
Reagan, Ronald and Nancy 506
Reamweaver  427
Re/appropriations  10, 425–431
reception 110, 197, 200, 201, 352–353
reciprocity 64–65
recirculation 428–430
recombination 59, 101, 279, 425
Recording Industry Association of America 
(RIAA) 307, 464, 505
recursion 23–25, 29, 31, 36n43
recycling 123, 125–126, 128
“redirectors” 425, 430
reengineering 427–428
reflexive remix 162n19 , 185, 186, 329, 348
regenerative remix 187, 329, 418
regulation 64, 230–231, 243, 251; see also  
copyright ; legality
Reid, Jamie 391, 412
Reilly, John C. 462, 464
reinterpretations 426–427
Re-inventing Culture  273–274
religion 120
Remix (software) 140
Remix+  27, 30, 33
remixability 148; collaborative 144–145; “deep” 
34n3, 74, 161, 419, 423n25
RE/Mixed Media Festival 10, 411–424
remixthebook  258, 264–265, 317
529
INDEXrepetition 47, 77, 108; innovation from 79; 
modular 326; In Two Minds  514
Report  414
representationalism 258, 259
reproducibility 70–71, 200
repurposing 334, 461, 492
resistance 8, 107–110, 117, 119, 128; avant-
garde 124; cultural 218; developing countries 
472; Navas on 261; video art in Latin 
America 173
Restrepo, José Alejandro 166–167, 168–169, 
173, 175
retailing 61–62
reverse engineering 15, 17, 30, 33, 145
revitalization 72
“reworking practices” 160
Reynolds, Simon 210
Rheingold, Howard 284
rhetoric 43, 45, 48, 50, 110, 347
“Right Wing Radio Duck” 353
right2remix 64–65, 218–219
rights, fair use 270–271
Rimbaud, Robin 209
Risério, Antonio 200
Rock, Pete 92, 93
Rocky films 464
Rodrigues, Harry 323
Romano, Gustavo 10, 425–431
Romney, Mitt 11, 498, 500, 501
“Ronda Rousey—She’s a Lady ( UFC  Remix)” 
464, 466
Rony, Fatimah Tobing 218
Rose Hobart  420
Roth, Cliff 506
Rouch, Jean 9, 387, 389–390, 392, 396n28
RSS feeds 138, 140, 141–142, 144, 146, 147–
148, 149, 151, 402, 406n47
Rushkoff, Douglas 127–128, 453
Russell, Ben 360
Russell, Byron 6, 217–223
Russolo, Luigi 55–56
Rutsky, R. L. 198
Sabia, Joe 274, 474
Sableman, Mark 457
sabotage 328
Sadler, Eric 88
Salt-n-Pepa 7, 299, 301–305
sampling 27, 29, 78, 146, 179, 262, 298, 376; 
Amen Break  444, 446; cost of technology 108; 
cultural memories 210; Daft Punk 30; Girl 
Talk 48–50; hip hop music 204–205, 207, 208; imitatio  45; invention 44; Isocrates 44, 46–47; 
mass culture 151; Navas on 259; oral history 
of 83–95; outlaw status of 110; right2remix 65
Sanguinetti, Gianfranco 388
satire 160, 272–273, 457; see also  parody
Saussure, Ferdinand de 17
Scandinavia 272
Scanner 93, 209
scarcity 8, 324, 325, 328, 330
Schaeffer, Pierre 56
scholarly practices 264
Schulz, David Paul 105
Schütze, Bernard 109
Schwartz, Hillel 208
Schwitters, Kurt 64
sci-fi 212
Scott, Ridley 206
scraperwiki.com 369
scratching 167–168, 173, 174, 175, 176n7 , 
176n11 , 298
Second Life  427
secrecy 337
Seeger, Pete 377
selecting/remixing distinction 142–143
selective imitation 76
selective remix 49–50, 182, 183, 348
selectivity 180, 184
self-censorship 7, 271
self-discipline 246, 252, 253, 256
self-expression 220, 228, 238–240, 242
semiosis 16, 17–20, 22, 24, 25–26, 27, 31, 33, 
35n22
semiotics 8, 16, 25, 34n4 , 334–335; of creative 
dissent 336, 337; intrasemiotic translation 
155, 162; political remix videos 9
7 Minute Sopranos  274
Sex in the City  11, 349–350, 416, 481–482
Sex Pistols 390–391, 412
sexuality 160, 185, 186, 187, 349–350, 351–352, 
481
Seymour, Jerszy 149
Shaffer, Tracy Stephenson 208
Shakespeare, William 57, 444
Shakur, Tupac 208
Shapiro, Laura 284, 292
Shaw, Blake 419
Shelley, Mary 189
Shields, David 411, 412
Shiga, John 331n23
The Shining  157, 158, 160
The Shining (Spoof Trailer)  158–159
Shipper’s Videos 160
530
INDEXShirky, Clay 61, 211
Shock G. 85, 93
Shocklee, Hank 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 298
Shocklee, Keith 88
Shockwave player 147
signification 16, 17, 170
signs 18–19, 20–21, 75, 333; digital media  
195–196; manipulation of signs in activist 
remixes 342, 344
Silva, Rick 264
Silverman, Tom 85, 87, 89, 90, 91, 95
Simon, Paul 377
Simple Living: Picking a Wild Salad  484
Sinnreich, Aaron 6–7, 227–245, 247
Situationist International (SI) 9, 56, 348, 360, 
386–396, 412, 414
Slajda, Renee 262
“slash films” 151, 284
“slipshot movies” 160
Sloop, John M. 346, 347–348, 349, 351
Smalls, Biggie 208
Smith, Abby 211
Smolanoff, Bruce 413
Snowden, Edward 9, 358
social guerrilla campaigns 336, 337, 341, 343
social media 2, 5, 60–61, 128, 135–153, 155; 
Arab Spring 62; communities of protest 375; 
culture 117; data sets 369; diffusion of ideas 
77; image sharing 175; locative media 358, 
359, 361; political protest 377; “preexisting 
stories” 455; “spreadability” 351; see also  
Facebook ; T witter
social networking 60, 63, 104
sociality 68, 76
The Society of the Spectacle 390, 391, 392, 393, 
395n27
software 5, 135–136, 137–138, 139–140, 
328, 393; BumpList  435–438; free software 
movement 64; interconnectivity 60; interface 
design 10; LiveWindow  433, 434; mashups 
329; modularity 146–147; open code 426; 
postproduction 161; production 150; 
remixability 145; see also  digital media
Sonic Outlaws  505
Sonvilla-Weiss, Stefan 4, 54–67, 227
sound 55–56
SoundCloud 381
Southworth, Kate 317
space 361, 367
spatial production 359
Special Report  506
spectacle 390, 395n27Spectres of the Spectrum  505
Spotplex 141
“spreadability” 351, 352, 354
Sprite 128
Sprout, Valmont 420
Stallabrass, Julian 126
standardization 149, 150, 333, 336, 344, 393
Star Trek  287
Star Wars  338, 340
Stavans, Ilan 379
Steal This Film  62
Steinski 419
Sterling, Bruce 138, 207
Sterne, Jonathan 209
Stewart, Jon 475
The Stooges 7, 299–301, 304–305
Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) 422, 423n30
Stravinsky, Igor 57
street art 31, 32
Stubblefield, Clyde 86, 87, 93
StumbleUpon 141
subjectivity 57, 58; authorship 99, 100, 101; 
European modernity 118
subvertising 338, 343
surfaces 73
Surrealists 55, 194, 318, 387, 389, 414
surveillance 252, 400, 468–469, 501
Swartz, Aaron 397
Sweatshoppe  419
“sweded” movies 5, 155, 157–158, 161
Sweden 62
Swedenberg, Ted 211–212
swiping 167–168, 171, 175
symbols 18, 32
synecdoches 29, 30, 32
synthesis 59, 69
tactical media 329
takedowns 7, 270, 278, 454, 455, 476, 478n26
Talbot, William Fox 55
Tannen, Deborah 22
Tape-Beatles 47, 85
Tapscott, Don 227
Tarde, Gabriel de 76–77, 79, 80n43
Tate, Greg 85, 86, 88, 90
Tavares, Monica 6, 192–203
Tea Party 500
technological determinism 105
technology: capital development 119; 
ethnomusicology 377; free culture 324; hip 
hop music 93; interfaces 432–443; Lessig on 
105; locative media 358–373; modularity 
531
INDEX73; mutational aesthetic 198; see also  digital 
media ; Internet ; software
Technorati 146
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre 405n16
telegraphy 438–439
telematic society 68–70, 71, 73, 75–76, 79
Teletubbies  506
television 151, 168–169, 211, 425; corporate 
control over 126; critiques of 167; vidding 
261, 283, 289
10x10 141
Tenney, Tom 10, 411–424
Terranova, Tiziana 331n22
texts 16–17, 54, 333; framework of culture 123; 
manipulation practices 343; political protest 
336, 339; semiotic theory of culture 334–335; 
see also  intertextuality
Théberge, Paul 108
thematic isotopy 154
Thicke, Robin 461, 469n1
This Film Is Not Yet Rated  277
Thomas, Tashima 5–6, 179–191
3D printing 329
The Time 303, 304
Time Warner 323
time-images 496
Titanic Two the Surface  156
Toffler, Alvin 79n10 , 400
Toirac, José 166–167, 173–175
Torlasco, Domietta 209
To Protect  166, 172–173
Toynbee, Jason 108
toys 329
trailers 5, 154–165
Trainspotting  156, 161
Trammell, Aaron 229
transformativeness 107, 110; ethics 247–248, 249–
250, 251, 252, 255; fair use 272, 274, 493; Grand 
Upright  case 298; political protest 335
translation 197, 199, 335, 429; digital media 
195–196; intrasemiotic 155, 162
transmedia narrative 316, 317
transparency 337
A Tribe Called Quest 90
Tribulation 99 505
Trow, George W . S. 211
Tryon, Chuck 157, 158–160, 163n46 , 163n48 , 
335
Tumblr 293, 480
Turnitin 450n1
The Turtles 90
Tushnet, Rebecca 107, 271TweetingSeat  433–435
T witter 122, 136, 428; Arab Spring 62; data 
sets 369, 371n35 ; political protest 382; 
standardization 393
2 Many DJs 7, 299, 304–307
Tzara, Tristan 56
U2 505
Ubermorgen 427–428
Ulmer, Gregory 317
Unilever 341
United Kingdom 272, 391, 471
United States: copyright 107, 271, 272, 296, 
298–299, 304, 307, 421, 422, 483; ethics 
survey 229–241, 242; fair use 277–278; 
Limitation on Exclusive Rights 251; mashups 
308; Occupy Wall Street 350; open data 
initiatives 359; political protest 375; political 
remix videos 495–501; telegraphy 438–439; 
vidding 288; video art in Latin America 170, 
172; YouTube users 376–377
Universal Music Group 453–456
University of California student protests 506
“unoriginal genius” concept 403
Urban Tapestries 361, 370, 371n21
Ure, Midge 377, 472
USA for Africa 472
use value 237, 328
user-as-producer concept 64
user-generated content (UGC) 104, 135–136, 
144, 150–151, 326, 328, 339; “cloud” 
communication 139, 140; copyright issues 
456–458, 483; fair use 454, 455; OECD 
guidelines 456; political protest 336, 375; 
YouTube 376
utterances 21
Vaidhyanathan, Siva 89, 91, 210–211, 227
Valenti, Jack 458
value, economic 327–328
values 30, 33, 78, 217
Van der Tuin, Iris 266n3
Van Dijck, José 204, 212
Varnedoe, Kirk 179–180
VCRs: political video remixes 504, 505, 506; 
vidding 287–288, 289
Vergara, Erandy 5, 166–178
vernacular discourses 346, 347–349, 351, 353–355
vernacular media 148
Vertov, Dziga 392, 417–418
Viacom 127, 271
Viacrucis  166, 168–169
532
INDEXvidding 7, 252, 261, 283–295
video 102, 139–140; anime music videos 144, 
288, 291, 461; critical remix videos 474, 
476; D’Alessandro’s work 10–11, 462–468; 
ethical video remix practice 246–257; fair 
use 270, 272, 277–279; feminist 480; In Two 
Minds  11, 509–515; multimedia in academic 
presentation 488–489; Occupy/Band Aid 
Mashup  471–479; political remix videos 
8–9, 261–262, 337–343, 346–357, 495–502, 
503–508; RE/Mixed Media Festival 416, 
418–419, 421; scratch video 176n11 ; self-
criminalization of remixers 271; software 137; 
video art in Latin America 166–178; see also  
film; YouTube
Video Data Bank 504
Vimeo 293, 377, 476
viruses 77
Visa Europe 343
vitalism 261
VividCon (VVC) 287, 291
Volkswagen 323, 337–340
Vote Different 474
The Walking Dead  461
Walt Disney 11, 444, 487, 488, 491–492, 493, 504
Wanono, Nadine 9, 386–396
Warhol, Andy 26, 31, 318
Wark, Ken 312
Warner, Michael 380, 381
Warner Bros. 83, 323
Watts, Alan 279
WaxAudio 374, 375, 378, 379, 381
wealth accumulation 326
Web 2.0 60, 107, 135, 140, 147–148, 429; 
collaborative remixability 145; free culture 
324; movie trailers 159; vidding 293
web browsers 140, 440
websites 140, 141, 147, 264
Weinberger, David 399, 404
Weingarten, Christopher R. 207, 417
Welch, Kathleen 44, 51n28
West, Patrick Leslie 229
Western  418
“WHAT?! DMCA Violation ( Step Brothers  
Remix)” 462, 464
What the Buck - to Oprah with Love  275
White, Lili 418
Wiki Constitution  429–430
Wikileaks 333, 343
Wikipedia 58, 316, 398, 430
wikis 265, 429
Wilde, Oscar 515Williams, Anthony D. 227
Williams, Kathleen Amy 221
Williams, Raymond 116, 117–118, 284
Williams, Saul 86, 90
Wilson, Robert 412, 413
Windows Live Photo Gallery 140
Winfrey, Oprah 275
The Winstons 445–446, 449
WIRED  magazine 138–139, 254
Wolman, Gil 56, 388
women: Arab Spring 62; Casta paintings 180; 
gender politics 480; The Queer Carrie Project  
481–482; RE/Mixed Media Festival 421; 
vidding 284, 285, 286, 287, 289, 292, 293; see 
also feminism ; gender
“Women Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver 
Remix)” 464, 465
Woodmansee, Martha 98–99
words, editing 499
Wordsworth, William 98
“World Water Shortage vs. Golf Course 
Consumption” 462, 463
World’s Fair Use Day (WFUD) 271, 462
Wu, Jason 347
Yahoo 61, 136, 139
Yew, J. 58
youTAG  426
YouTube 7, 61, 135, 148, 376–377; Arab 
Spring 62; Can I Get an Amen?  446, 447, 
448–449; Content ID system 255, 270, 480, 
483, 484–485; copyright infringements 415, 
483; D’Alessandro’s work 462, 466; early 
period of 382; fair use 7, 270, 272, 278; A 
Fair(y) Use Tale  487; “Harlem Shake” 323; 
hybridity 348; “Imagine This” 380; Let’s Go 
Crazy #1  453–456, 457; Manifestoon  504; 
movie trailers 5, 156, 158; Occupy/Band Aid 
Mashup  476; political protest 335, 375, 381, 
382; Queer Carrie  353; revenue model 327; 
“spreadability” 351; standardization 393; 
Thru-You project 474; vidding 284, 285, 288, 
291, 292, 293; youTAG  426
zapping 167–168, 169, 170, 171, 173, 175, 
176n7
Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie 
(ZKM) 504
Zero G 445
zipping 167, 176n7
Zisk, Shoshana 85, 90, 91
Žižek, Slavoj 167, 176n5 , 176n6
Zylinska, Joanna 260–261
