THE POETICS OF  
INFORMATION OVERLOAD
Gertrude Stein at the T eletype. Gertrude Stein and Alice B. T oklas Papers, 
YCAL MSS 76, Box 149, Folder 3528, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript 
Library, Y ale University.
THE POETICS OF  
INFORMATION OVERLOAD
FROM GERTRUDE STEIN  
TO CONCEPTUAL WRITING
Paul Stephens
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis • London
An earlier version of chapter 1 appeared as “‘Reading at It’: Gertrude Stein,  
Information Overload, and the Makings of Americanitis,” T wentieth-  Century  
Literature  59, no. 1 (2013): 126–  56. An earlier version of chapter 2 appeared as “Bob 
Brown, ‘Inforg’: The ‘Readies’ at the Limits of Modernist Cosmopolitanism,” Journal 
of Modern Literature  35, no. 1 (2011): 143–  64; copyright Indiana University Press. An 
earlier version of chapter 3 appeared as “Human University: Charles Olson and the 
Embodiment of Information,” Paideuma  39 (August 2012): 181–  208; reprinted with 
permission from the National Poetry Foundation. An earlier version of chapter 6 
appeared as “V anguard T otal Index: Conceptual Writing, Information Asymmetry, 
and the Risk Society,” Contemporary Literature  54, no. 4 (2013): 752–  84; copyright 
2013 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System; reproduced 
courtesy of the University of Wisconsin Press.
The poem “ Asphodel, That Greeny Flower,” by William Carlos Williams, is from 
The Collected Poems: Volume II, 1939–  1962, ed. A. W alton Litz and Christopher 
MacGowan (New Y ork: New Directions, 1986); copyright 1944 by William Carlos 
Williams; reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Copyright 2015 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,  
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written  
permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290
Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stephens, Paul.
The poetics of information overload : from Gertrude Stein to conceptual writing / 
Paul Stephens.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN  978-0-8166-9439-6 (hc : acid-free paper)— ISBN  978-0-8166-9441-9  
(pb : acid-free paper)
1. American poetry—20th century—History and criticism. 2. American 
poetry—21st century—History and criticism. 3. Poetry, Modern—History and 
criticism. 4. Literature and technology. 5. Poetics. 6. Modernism (Literature)—
United States. 7. Information technology in literature. I. Title.
PS310.M 57S74 2015 
811´509112—dc23
                                             2014019916
Printed in the United States of America on acid-  free paper
The University of Minnesota is an equal-  opportunity educator and employer.
20 19 18 17 16 15      10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is dedicated to  
Adrienne Whitehead, Allison Stephens,  
Amy Stephens, Andric Stephens, Chris Davey,  
Jay Davey, and Scott Ryno Stephens
This page intentionally left blank 
CONTENTS
  Preface: Stars in My Pocket Like Bits of Data  ix
  Introduction  1
 1. “Reading at It”: Gertrude Stein, Information Overload,  
  and the Makings of Americanitis  37
 2. Bob Brown, “Inforg”: The “Readies” at the Limits of  
  Modernist Cosmopolitanism  63
 3. Human University: Charles Olson and the Embodiment  
  of Information  87
 4. “When Information Rubs/Against Information”: Poetry  
  and Informatics in the Expanded Field in the 1960s  109
 5. Paradise and Informatics: Lyn Hejinian, Bruce Andrews,  
  and the Posthuman Adamic  133
 6. V anguard T otal Index: Conceptual Writing, Information  
  Asymmetry, and the Data Glut  153
   Afterword. “Proliferating Raw Data”: Robert Grenier  
in the Expanded Field of New Media Poetics  177
  Acknowledgments  189
  Notes  191
  Index  235
This page intentionally left blank 
PREFACE
STARS IN MY POCKET  
LIKE BITS OF DATA
Everybody gets so much information all day long that they lose their 
common sense.
— Gertrude Stein, “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb” (1946)
It is a very sad thing that nowadays there is so little useless information.
—  Oscar Wilde, “ A Few Maxims for the Instruction of the  
Over-  Educated” (1894)
There are 3.5 million stars in my pocket—  stored in the SkyV oyager 
app, and mapped instantaneously relative to my position on the Earth’s 
surface. All 924 North American bird species and their songs are in-  
cluded with iBird Explorer Pro. I have nearly unlimited access to music; 
I can audio-  record my entire day; I can record high-  definition video and 
send it wirelessly. There are over forty thousand messages in my Gmail 
inbox. The world’s major newspapers are continually updated by the 
minute. Thanks to my mobile web browser, I have access to more words 
than were contained in the National Library of Ireland on June 16, 1904.1 
On that day Leopold Bloom carried the following items in his pocket:
Potato
Kidney
1 ½ pounds Denny’s sausage
Letter to Henry Flower from Martha Clifford (and later the crumpled 
envelope of this letter)
Lemon soap
Card (Henry Flower)
Freeman’s Journal
Handkerchief
ix
x Preface
Pocket watch (stops before 8)
French Letter (slang for condom)
Bread
Agendath Netaim  advertisement
Chocolate
Sweets of Sin  (book)
Pocketbook
Photo of Molly
Assorted monies2
It is an eclectic, messy, symbolically laden catalog—  leaning heavily 
toward food and text. Over a century later, an updated version of mod -
ernism’s iconic everyman would likely carry fewer physical sources of 
information. The letter, the newspaper, the card, the advertisement, the 
book, the photo, and the pocket watch could all be supplanted by a 
four-  ounce iPhone (available in Ireland and over two hundred other 
countries). Bloom’s money could easily be replaced with plastic (credit 
cards of course did not exist in 1904; we are never told whether Bloom 
has any identification on him). The  Freeman’s Journal  Bloom carries 
contains news of the General Slocum  disaster in New Y ork Harbor on 
June 15. Even in 1904, news traveled quickly. Since the introduction of 
the telegraph, words have traveled with near instantaneity across long 
distances. In The Victorian Internet , T om Standage quotes the Daily 
Te l e g r a p h ’s claim in 1843 that “time itself is telegraphed out of existence.”3 
F . T. Marinetti claims similarly in his epochal 1909 “Futurist Manifesto,” 
“Time and space died yesterday.”4
A century later, the statistics are nonetheless astonishing. The prob -
lem of information overload is often described as a spreading and dan -
gerous epidemic, although much disagreement exists as to its causes 
and its cures. According to a recent study by the Global Information 
Industry Center at the University of California, San Diego, the average 
American “consumed” one hundred thousand words per day in 2008.5 
Print accounted for only 8.51 percent of words consumed. T elevision 
accounted for 44.85 percent while computers accounted for 26.97 per -
cent (not including games). The same study made its biggest headlines 
by estimating that the average American encounters a total of 36 giga -
bytes of information daily. The neologism “exaflood” has recently been 
coined to describe conditions under which “between 2006 and 2010 the 
 Preface  xi
global quantity of digital data will have increased more than six-  fold 
from 161 exabytes to 988 exabytes.”6 T o put this in perspective, “in 2003, 
researchers at Berkeley’s School of Information Management and Sys -
tems estimated that humanity had accumulated approximately 12 exa -
bytes of data (1 exabyte corresponds to 1018 bytes or a 50,000 year–  long 
video of DVD quality) in the course of its entire history until the com -
modification of computers.”7 More data has been created and stored 
since the turn of millennium than in the entire history of humanity. 
The metaphors for the phenomenon—  flood, torrent, tsunami, overflow, 
glut, inundation, saturation—  are consistently liquid.8 James Gleick’s re-  
cent best seller The Information: A Theory, a History, a Flood , for instance, 
deploys the metaphor in its title.9 A selection of books published on  
the topic give a good sense of the life and death, sink or swim, stakes 
involved: Data Smog: Surviving the Information Glut ; Distracted: The 
Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark Age ; Media Unlimited: How the 
T orrent of Images and Sounds Overwhelms Our Lives ; The Overflowing 
Brain: Information Overload and the Limits of Working Memory . The pre -
ceding titles, it should be noted, are all published by reputable university 
or trade presses. Far more examples could be drawn from popular self-  
help literature, as well as from management culture (in the form of books, 
seminars, proprietary reports, and consulting programs). A brief glance 
at the covers of information-  overload self-  help books (Figure 1) gives an 
idea of the range of issues at play. With perfect postmodern irony, infor -
mation overload has even created its own self-  propelled industry. The 
consulting firm Basex, which specializes in helping large corporations 
deal with the phenomenon, routinely grabs headlines in major news -
papers with its claim that information overload costs the U.S. economy 
$900 billion per year (the data on which they base these claims is con -
sidered proprietary and is not made public).10 Basex has even helpfully 
declared August 12 an annual “Information-  Overload Awareness Day.”
Science fiction did not prepare us for this—  nor did avant-  garde 
poetry, although many of the central aesthetic and political questions 
with regard to information overload are addressed or anticipated within 
twentieth-  century avant-  garde writing. Time and space may have died 
over a century ago, but information has increasingly taken on a life of  
its own—  literally, according to some, who would ascribe a kind of 
global noetic consciousness or mathematical sublimity to the vastness 
of the Internet. In his 1984 novel Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand , 
Figure 1.  Four examples of information-  overload self-  help books.

xiv Preface
Samuel Delany presciently described a futuristic communication “web” 
a decade before Tim Berners-  Lee coined the term “W orld Wide W eb.”11 
Delany foresaw a future in which there is radical information inequality, 
but in which it is also possible to travel to six thousand worlds. Delany’s 
novel suggests that more words may not necessarily mean that we will 
have access to more worlds. For now we only have one world—  and we 
have no choice but to come to terms with instantaneous global flows of 
information.
The philosopher Bernard Stiegler has recently suggested that we 
should rethink the pervasive effects of information technology through 
the lens of what he calls “psycho-  power.” Although I find this designa -
tion problematically vague, I also find it suggestive of the larger range of 
issues that surround questions of information saturation. For Stiegler, 
“psycho-  power is the systematic organisation of the capture of attention 
made possible by the psycho-  technologies that have developed with the 
radio (1920), with television (1950) and with digital technologies (1990), 
spreading all over the planet through various forms of networks, and 
resulting in a constant industrial canalization of attention which has 
provoked recently a massive phenomenon of the destruction of this 
attention that American nosologists call attention deficit disorder. This 
destruction of attention is a particular case, and an especially serious 
one, of the destruction of libidinal energy whereby the capitalist econ -
omy self-  destructs.”12 A number of modern and postmodern narratives 
coalesce in this passage: the mass media is envisioned as a predatory 
organism, and technocratic capitalism is seen as essentially at odds with 
the genuine acquisition of knowledge and experience. T echnology in this 
model essentially holds out innumerable lures that distract us from our 
real desires. While there is much to be said for Stiegler’s provocations, 
there are also qualifications to be made. Despite reservations about 
some of Stiegler’s more extreme formulations (discussed at greater 
length below, in the introduction, under the subheading “The Econom -
ics of Attention”), I share his concern that the increasing rapidity of 
capitalism’s “creative destruction” process takes a severe toll on individ -
ual psyches, as well as exacerbating unequal patterns of information 
distribution globally.
In a recent commencement address, even the president of the United 
States referred to the problem. Speaking at the historically black Hamp -
ton University, Barack Obama told students that they were “coming of 
 Preface  xv
age in a 24/7 media environment that bombards us with all kinds of 
content and exposes us to all kinds of arguments, some of which don’t 
always rank that high on the truth meter. And with iPods and iPads; 
and Xboxes and PlayStations—  none of which I know how to work—  
(laughter)—  information becomes a distraction, a diversion, a form of 
entertainment, rather than a tool of empowerment, rather than the 
means of emancipation. So all of this is not only putting pressure on 
you; it’s putting new pressure on our country and on our democracy.”13 
What is most surprising about this passage is Obama’s use of the word 
“emancipation.” As the president noted in his address, Hampton was 
founded by ex-  slaves in 1861. Obama is in a sense presenting a version of 
what might be called the “dialectic of information”: greater access to 
information does not necessarily lead to increasing enlightenment. The 
implication would be that both information excess and human bondage 
are fundamentally antithetical to individual autonomy, and at odds with 
an “informed” citizenry. Even if this is the case, the moral problem of 
slavery would seem to be of an entirely different order than that of 
information overload—  one would not, for example, casually refer to 
“information slavery.” The direct target of Obama’s concern may be 
right-  wing news outlets such as Fox, but he also expresses a larger gen -
erational concern that new information technologies are regressive in 
their effects on the young. Other than counseling old-  fashioned self-  
control, the president had no practical solutions to offer.
Avant-  garde poetry may have a small role to play in our understand -
ing of global information flows; on the other hand, the avant-  garde has 
always aspired to be predictive, to keep up with the present, to stay ahead 
of history. The avant-  garde’s attempts to maintain critical distance from 
mainstream bourgeois values may be grandiose and hyperbolic—  but 
the questions raised by avant-  garde movements should not be dis -
missed as nihilistic or as unrepresentative of larger social developments. 
T o adapt a question posed by Lyn Hejinian—  “Isn’t the avant-  garde 
always pedagogical?”—  I would ask, “Isn’t the avant-  garde always tech -
nological?”14 Much of the work of the twentieth-  century avant-  garde 
was extremely self-  conscious of the rapid changes in technologies of 
communication and data storage. From Dada photomontage to hyper -
text poetry, avant-  garde methodology has been deeply concerned with 
remediation and transcoding—  the movement from one technological 
medium or format to another.15 As Brian Reed has recently written, 
xvi Preface
“Poetry is a language-  based art with a penchant for reflecting on its 
channels of communication.”16 For Reed, poetry “offers unparalleled 
opportunities for coming to grips with the new media ecology. Poets, as 
they experiment with transmediation, serially bring to light each medi -
um’s textures, contours, and inner logic.”17 While poetry may seem the 
most non-  technological of literary genres, I show that poets were often 
obsessed by the changing nature of information and its dissemination 
in the twentieth century. The news that there is more news than we can 
process is not so new: while avant-  garde poetry may not figure promi -
nently in the global information glut, the global information glut figures 
prominently in avant-  garde poetry. However marginal it may seem, 
poetry will long outlast our current media platforms:
Look at
what passes for the new.
Y ou will not find it there but in
despised poems.
It is difficult
to get the news from poems
yet men die miserably every day
for lack
of what is found there.
Hear me out  . . .18
1INTRODUCTION
Relevant information’s hard to come by. Soon it’ll be everywhere, 
unnoticed.
— John Cage, A Y ear from Monday
A human being takes in far more information than he or she can put out. 
“Stupidity” is a process or strategy by which a human, in response to 
social denigration of the information she or he puts out, commits him-    
or herself to taking in no more information than she or he can put out. 
(Not to be confused with ignorance, or lack of data.)
— Samuel Delany, Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand
The Aesthetics of Information Overload
Anyone surveying the topic of information overload is bound to run 
headlong into the phenomenon him-   or herself. The topic has attracted 
the attention of media theorists, futurologists, sociologists, librarians, 
historians, computer scientists, psychologists, neuroscientists, popular 
pundits, management theorists—  as well as, this book argues, poets.
The Poetics of Information Overload  explores twentieth-   and twenty-  
first-  century literary works that partake of, as well as parody, the informa -
tion glut that characterizes modernity. Although information technology 
has typically been figured as hostile or foreign to poetry, I suggest that 
avant-  garde poetry has been centrally concerned with technologies of 
communication, data storage, and bureaucratic control—  not simply re-  
jecting those technologies, but also adopting and commenting on them. 
Much of the poetry discussed in this book has been dismissed as “non-  
referential” or unreadable; by reading this poetry through the lens of 
information systems and data practices, I show that the poetry of the 
past century has had much to say about the effects of new media. Rather 
than being antithetical to technological change, avant-  garde poetry has 
been closely tied to it.1 Although scholars from other fields have devoted 
considerable attention to information overload, this book is the first to 
2 Introduction
account for the phenomenon in relation to modernist and contempo -
rary poetry.
As detailed in my historical survey below, I understand information 
overload broadly as a range of phenomena relating to the limits of cog -
nition, perception, and memory (both personal and collective). Rather 
than passively observing an end of history, or drowning in information, 
avant-  garde writers have swum within and against the currents of infor -
mation flows—  demonstrating not only agitation but also absorption.  
If one replaces the word “art” with “poetry” in the following sentence,  
it is possible to get an idea of what I mean with respect to poetry: “Data 
art reflects a contemporary worldview informed by data excess; ungrasp -
able quantity, wide distribution, mobility, heterogeneity, flux.”2 Poetry 
“informed by data excess” has been with us at least since the emergence 
of modernism. Virtually the same transposition could be performed on 
the following sentence from Victoria V esna’s Database Aesthetics: Art in 
the Age of Information Overflow , in which she suggests, “In an age in 
which we are increasingly aware of ourselves as databases, identified  
by social security numbers and genetic structures, it is imperative that 
artists actively participate in how data is shaped, organized, and dis -
seminated.”3 This active participation in the shaping, organization, and 
dissemination of information has been an important, though under -
appreciated, ongoing concern of avant-  garde poetics on the levels of 
both form and content.
This study takes modernism as its point of departure because so 
many of the key concerns surrounding information saturation were first 
articulated in the late nineteenth century, long before the advent of the 
computer or the Internet. As Tim Wu has shown, the first all-  powerful 
American “information empires” were not IBM, Microsoft, Apple, Ama -
zon, or Google—  but rather W estern Union (telegraphy), the Bell Sys -
tem (telephony), and RCA (radio and television).4 Before there was a 
“mimeograph revolution” in the 1960s, there was a “magazine revolution” 
that began in the 1890s.5 Mark Morrisson succinctly identifies the con -
ditions that brought about such a revolution: “Cheap paper, the rotary 
press, the Linotype machine—  at the most mundane level, these inven -
tions led to the explosion of mass market print publications and adver -
tising at the end of the nineteenth century in Britain and America.”6 As 
early as his 1926 One-  Way Street , W alter Benjamin would locate the  
origins of poetic modernism in Mallarmé’s reaction to unprecedented 
 Introduction  3
“locust swarms of print” in the 1890s.7 Benjamin worried that ever-  
cheaper means of reproduction would lead to literary writing being “piti -
lessly dragged out into the street by advertisements and subjected to  
the brutal heteronomies of economic chaos.”8 But he also foresaw that 
poets—  “the first and foremost experts in writing”—  would have a cen -
tral role to play in the creation of a revolutionary new “picture-  writing.”9
In chapter 1, I explore Gertrude Stein’s importance as an inaugural 
figure in a tradition of sprawling works which, in her own words, can -
not be read, but can only be “read at.” Kenneth Goldsmith, perhaps the 
most influential of contemporary appropriation poets, places his writ -
ing in the Stein tradition. Stein, he suggests, “often set up a situation of 
skimming, knowing that few were going to be reading her epic works 
straight through (how many people have literally read every word of 
The Making of Americans ?) . . . Much of Stein’s writing was never meant 
to be read closely at all, rather she was deploying visual means of read -
ing. What appeared to be densely unreadable and repetitive was, in fact, 
designed to be skimmed, and to delight the eye (in a visual sense) while 
holding the book. Stein, as usual, was prescient in predicting our read -
ing habits.”10 Goldsmith (himself trained as a sculptor) shifts the liter -
ary value of Stein’s saturated writing from narrative or semantic levels 
to visual and aural levels. Whereas visual pleasure in reading is often 
associated with minimalist works, or with concrete or visual poetry, 
Goldsmith suggests that there can be an equivalent pleasure in skim -
ming large quantities of text. In surveying Stein’s writing in relation to 
technology over the course of her career, I suggest that Stein was con -
cerned with the effects of information saturation from her early writing 
in the 1890s until her very last written composition, “Reflection on the 
Atomic Bomb” in 1946. As Mark Goble writes in Beautiful Circuits: 
Modernism and the Mediated Life , “Stein exemplifies the new mode of 
writing that Friedrich Kittler calls ‘the discourse network of 1900,’ which 
understands the medium of words as powerfully challenged by the abil -
ity of film and other ‘technological media’ to record and store experience 
of every kind.”11
In chapter 2, I show how Bob Brown, in claiming that Stein inspired 
him to create his reading machine, also read Stein’s work in relation to 
technological change. Without using the term proper, Stein and Brown 
both thematize information overload in ways starkly at odds with the 
Pound/Eliot/Joyce model of obsessively cataloging cultural history. 
4 Introduction
Stein’s resistance to proper names and to direct quotation suggests a 
radical break between history and lived memory, as well as between 
stored information and immediate sensory data. With regard to Joyce, 
Stein claimed, “Y ou see it is the people who smell of the museums who 
are accepted, and it is the new who are not accepted. Y ou have got to 
accept a complete difference. It is hard to accept that, it is much easier 
to have one hand in the past. That is why James Joyce was accepted and 
I was not. He leaned toward the past, in my work the newness and dif -
ference is fundamental.”12 The museum, like the archive and the library, 
preserves the data of the past. From Stein’s perspective, Joyce’s writing  
is profoundly paleonymic—  that is, it preserves proper names rather 
than interrupting the patriarchal process of genealogical affiliation. Both 
Ulysses  and The Making of Americans  are supremely overloaded (or over -
flowing) works—  but it would be impossible to list the contents of the 
pockets of the latter’s protagonist, David Hersland, much less to map 
his information intake on a particular day.13
Charles Olson, I argue in chapter 3, modified the Pound/Williams 
model of the poet as prolific autodidact. Williams’s late-  1920s Embodi -
ment of Knowledge  is indicative of modernist hostility toward universities 
as well as toward the growing specialization of knowledge. As rector of 
Black Mountain College, Olson championed a radically interdisciplin -
ary curriculum. As early as 1949, he incorporated the language of cyber -
netics into his poem “The Kingfishers,” which would go on to be the 
opening poem in Donald Allen’s New American Poetry , the most influ -
ential poetry anthology of the postwar period. Olson champions an 
insatiable desire to embody information; at the same time, his attempt 
to synthesize vast bodies of information from disparate fields culmi -
nates in The Maximus Poems ’ failure to communicate that information to 
the townspeople of Gloucester, Massachusetts (the putative addressees 
of Olson’s epic). Olson, I suggest, is both a hero and a victim of infor -
mation overload—  tragically, as well as self-  parodically, at various points 
in his career.
The fourth chapter, “‘When Information Rubs/Against Information’: 
Poetry and Informatics in the Expanded Field in the 1960s,” discusses 
the writing of John Cage, Bern Porter, Bernadette Mayer, and Hannah 
W einer, all of whom refer to information overload in the mid to late ’60s. 
Influenced in large part by Marshall McLuhan, they increasingly incor -
porated informatic motifs and issues into their writing—  demonstrating 
 Introduction  5
a recurring fascination with what the art historians Hannah Higgins 
and Douglas Kahn describe as the “mainframe experimentalism” of the 
1960s.14 Although pre-  digital, the “mimeograph revolution” of the 1960s 
lowered barriers to publication and enabled poets (often in the com -
pany of artists) to experiment with visual and found texts in journals 
such as 0 T o 9 . Cage, Porter, Mayer, and Wiener (all of whom were 
published in 0 T o 9 ) exhibit a keen interest in new telecommunications 
and data-  storage technologies, and their writing explores a rich array of 
issues related to the emergence of a postindustrial “information society.”
Language poets who came of age as writers in the 1970s, such as Lyn 
Hejinian and Bruce Andrews, produced new kinds of saturated poetic 
texts, which I explore in chapter 5. In My Life  and The Cell , Hejinian 
offers a dense mix of immediate personal sensory data and public infor -
mation (or misinformation). Likewise, Andrews recycles the linguistic 
detritus of consumer culture into radically paratactic poems. W orks such 
as Andrews’s I Don’t Have Any Paper, So Shut Up (or Social Romanticism)  
ask us to reconfigure our notions of personhood and communicative 
agency. In response to an information-  saturated world, Andrews fights 
saturation with more saturation. Hejinian employs similar strategies—  
but whereas there is practically no sense of personal recollection in 
Andrews’s poetry, Hejinian routinely interjects seemingly insignificant 
personal memories into her poems. “Memory is the money of my class,” 
she writes in My Life , drawing our attention to the value accorded to 
information within different contexts.15 Nostalgia reifies bourgeois con -
ceptions of family and identity; information saturation threatens to 
undermine such markers of origin.
Drawing on the legacy of conceptual art, recent works of conceptual 
writing by poets such as Goldsmith, Robert Fitterman, V anessa Place, 
and T an Lin—  which I discuss in chapter 6—  have been consistently en-  
gaged with new media and with questions of appropriation and reme -
diation. Goldsmith’s Day could well stand as an answer to a rhetorical 
question posed by Basex’s 2007 report on information overload: “What 
is a knowledge worker to do in a world where the Sunday edition of  
the New Y ork Times  has more information than the amount of informa -
tion an average person alive 400 years ago might have come across in  
his lifetime?”16 While Basex Inc. hyperbolically stresses the existential 
threat of information overload, Goldsmith sanguinely engages it by 
retyping, without any semantic alteration, an entire day of the New Y ork 
6 Introduction
Times . Retyping the Times  significantly reconfigures our sense of its 
context and meaning. “ All the news that’s fit to print”—  but from whose 
perspective? “Fit” in the sense of size? Or “fit” in the sense of appropri -
ate? In book form, the September 1, 2000, edition of the New Y ork Times  
Late Edition takes up 836 pages. Y et Day does not feel encyclopedic in 
the manner of Ulysses . Ulysses  demands that we pay attention to the 
specificity of its allusions; Day does not. As readers, we cannot possibly 
master the mostly forgettable and/or immediately obsolete information 
of the national paper of record. While the management culture writing 
on information overload continually stresses that workers and knowl -
edge consumers need to exert more careful control over information, 
Goldsmith and other conceptual writers suggest that we can only exert 
such control with great difficulty. As a writer, Goldsmith voluntarily 
gives up control over many aspects of his process. From Goldsmith’s 
perspective, there were few variables involved in producing Day— and 
little or no skill or craft was required. I suggest that Goldsmith’s work, 
along with other recent works of conceptual writing, can be situated in 
the context of the emergence of cognitive capitalism and the intensifica -
tion of the “risk society,” particularly in the wake of the 2008 financial 
crisis.
Although I express reservations about the term “information over -
load”—  due primarily to its potential for technological determinism—   
I think it is here to stay, and I follow the lead both of popular usage, as 
well of scholars from diverse disciplines, in adopting the term to refer  
to a range of phenomena related to information abundance. A chart 
(Figure 2) produced by Google’s Ngram Viewer gives an idea of the 
increasing frequency with which the term appears in the Google Books 
database. “Information overload” first began to appear in journals of 
psychology and organizational management around 1960. The term is 
sometimes traced to Bertram Gross’s 1964 The Management of Organi -
zations , but it clearly circulated in a number of contexts prior to this.17 
The term appears in Marshall McLuhan’s writing for the first time in 
the 1964 talk “Cybernetics and Culture”: “T oday, the ordinary child lives 
in an electronic environment; he lives in a world of information over -
load. From infancy he is confronted with the television image, with its 
braille-  like texture and profoundly involving character.  . . . Any moment 
of television provides more data than could be recorded in a dozen 
pages of prose.”18 Here, television is considered the primary culprit and 
 Introduction  7
children the primary victims. McLuhan’s later writings would expand 
considerably on the theme of information overload (as I detail in chap -
ter 4), but perhaps the greatest credit for popularizing the term should 
to go to Alvin T offler’s 1970 Future Shock , which drew on Gross’s work.19 
Gross in turn cited V annevar Bush’s 1945 “ As W e May Think” as the 
earliest theorization of the problem. The rise of information theory in 
the 1940s, accomplished by figures such as Bush, Alan T uring, Norbert 
W einer, John von Neumann, Claude Shannon, and W arren W eaver, 
brought with it far-  reaching implications. Like the computer itself, the 
postwar notion of information overload could be said to emerge at the 
complex intersection of military, corporate, and educational interests.20
The emergence of the term proper in the early 1960s can be most 
closely linked to the need among management theorists to achieve greater 
efficiency, and among psychologists to assess the impact of new tech -
nologies. But beyond this, there is little consensus when it comes to the 
history of the larger phenomenon. Reputable scholars have variously 
located the origins of information overload in the library at Alexandria, 
in medieval scriptoria, in the printing revolution of early modern Europe, 
in the Enlightenment’s “reading revolution,” in the late-  nineteenth cen -
tury’s “control revolution,” in the post-  1945 development of computers, 
as well as in the post-  1990s growth of the Internet.21 Others have argued 
that the problem of information overload has been greatly exaggerated—  
Figure 2.  The Google Books Ngram Viewer is still in the beta stage of 
development and remains unreliable in terms of producing precise results.  
I reproduce this chart mainly to demonstrate broadly the post-  1960 
proliferation of the term “information overload.”
8 Introduction
either out of elitist fear of mass culture, or out of misunderstanding the 
nature of information and its dissemination.
Using the term “information overflow” to describe artworks that in-  
corporate databases, Victoria V esna has suggested another approach in 
her Database Aesthetics . While I find her substitution of “overflow” for 
“overload” suggestive in that it shows the response of artists and writers 
to information saturation not to be an exclusively negative one, I retain 
the terminology of “overload,” in part because it describes conditions  
of exhaustion common to “knowledge workers” (a term first coined by 
the management guru Peter Drucker in 1959). Among the most consis -
tently articulated concerns of those who have written on the subject  
has been the sense that workers, readers, and computer users experi -
ence fatigue. Unlike the more general “overflow,” “overload” more force -
fully takes account of how often the phenomenon is linked to questions 
of “infostress” or “information anxiety.”22 Both “overload” and “overflow” 
convey a strong sense of the limitations of the human capacity to absorb 
data, but “overflow” may put a more favorable spin on the phenomenon 
by eliding the sense of agitation implicit in “overload.” “Overflow,” partic -
ularly in the context of poetry, connotes the sublime, an important aes -
thetic analogue of information abundance. Recent critics have variously 
used the terms “digital sublime,” “information sublime,” and “bureaucratic 
sublime” to describe twentieth-   and twenty-  first-  century conditions of 
information abundance.23 W ordsworth famously spoke of poetry as the 
“spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings,” but insisted that it be 
found in “tranquility.” A key aspect of the sublime, according to Kant,  
is that “the feeling of the sublime carries with it, as its character, a men-  
tal agitation.”24 Drawing on Kant (and with direct reference to Stein), 
Sianne Ngai has coined the term “stuplimity” to describe the negative 
affects, or “ugly feelings,” associated with the sublime.25
Many of the major aesthetic debates of the twentieth century—  over, 
for instance, perception, style, technological reproducibility, cultural 
memory, and canonicity—  take on new valences in the context of infor -
mation overload. Primarily following the lead of media theorists and art 
historians, this book rereads the avant-  garde poetic tradition through 
the lens of its engagement with information overload. Sven Spieker 
goes so far as to “view early-  twentieth-  century modernism as a reaction 
formation to the storage crisis that came in the wake of Beniger’s [con -
trol] revolution, a giant paper jam based on the exponential increase in 
 Introduction  9
stored data, both in the realm of public administration and in large 
companies whose archives were soon bursting at the seams.”26 Spieker 
claims ingeniously that “Dadaist montage functions as an anti-  archive 
that . . . reacts to the traumatizing paper jam that occurred in the wake 
of the First W orld W ar (no other event in history generated as much 
paperwork).”27 The approach taken by Spieker suggests the rich inter -
relation between twentieth-  century aesthetic form and new data-  
storage techniques.
Jean Baudrillard maintains that “we live in a world where there is 
more and more information, and less and less meaning.”28 This I find a 
reductive formulation. More information does not necessarily lead to 
less meaning (and properly speaking, Baudrillard would be better off 
using the term “data” rather than the term “information,” since informa -
tion, at least as understood by information theory, must by definition 
convey meaningful data).29 The claim that information overload is at 
odds with narrative fiction could be understood as a version of the com -
plaint that more information leads to less meaning. David Shields’s 
recent Reality Hungers , for instance, argues that “we’re overwhelmed 
right now by calamitous information. The real overwhelms the fictional, 
is incomparably more compelling than an invented drama.”30 W alter 
Benjamin claims similarly in his 1936 “The Storyteller” that “if the art  
of storytelling has become rare, the dissemination of information has 
played a decisive role in this state of affairs. Every morning brings news 
from across the globe, yet we are poor in noteworthy stories.”31 For Ben -
jamin and Shields, information excess is opposed to authentic experi -
ence and to our ability to impose narrative coherence on the world. In 
response, both Benjamin and Shields practice collage/appropriation 
techniques in order to recuperate lost meaning. In so doing, they create 
new (and often surprisingly personal) narratives that decry information 
excess at the same time that they thrive on guiding readers through that 
excess.
When T.  S. Eliot asks in the 1934 “The Rock” “Where is the wisdom 
we have lost in knowledge? / Where is the knowledge we have lost  
in information?” he is articulating a key high modernist anxiety.32 A  
surplus of data threatens access to cultural tradition as well as to reli -
able political information. Max W eber’s main thesis in the 1919 “Science 
as a V ocation”—  which would go on to be the central claim of Adorno 
and Horkheimer’s Dialectic of Enlightenment — is that “the increasing 
10 Introduction
intellectualization and rationalization of the world do not  . . . indicate 
an increased and general knowledge of the conditions under which one 
lives.”33 The culture industry, in Adorno and Horkheimer’s terms, 
thrives off the overproduction of sensory data. As theorized by Sieg -
fried Kracauer and W alter Benjamin, the masses are distracted by mass 
culture’s dazzling ornamentalism.34 They lose control over knowledge; 
by succumbing to mass culture they surrender their very ability to make 
informed political decisions.35
High modernism’s relation to mass culture has been amply discussed 
elsewhere—  what should be particularly noted here is the degree to which 
modernist writers were preoccupied by the profusion of information 
brought about by new technologies of communication and storage.36 
Near the opening of his first essay collection, The Sacred Wood , Eliot 
writes:
The vast accumulations of knowledge—  or at least of information—  
deposited by the nineteenth century have been responsible for an equally 
vast ignorance. When there is so much to be known, when there are so 
many fields of knowledge in which the same words are used with different 
meanings, when every one knows a little about a great many things, it 
becomes increasingly difficult for anyone to know whether he knows what 
he is talking about or not. And when we do not know, or when we do not 
know enough, we tend always to substitute emotions for thoughts.37
Eliot’s concern with information abundance, this passage shows, was 
related to his theory of emotions and individual expression—  the sub -
ject of his most famous essay, “Tradition and the Individual T alent,” also 
included in The Sacred Wood . Eliot’s worries about the effects of “vast 
accumulations of . . . information” were widely shared by his contempo -
raries. Modernist poets demonstrate a keen preoccupation with guiding 
the tastes of the “average reader”—  works such as Pound’s ABC of Read -
ing or Louis Zukofsky’s A T est of Poetry  function as primers on what 
and how to read. Every anthology or great books list could be said to  
be an attempt to contain a flood of possibilities—  Pound’s attempt to 
condense and synthesize general culture for his readers is explicitly 
couched in terms of rescuing the modern autodidact from the research 
library. Pound is routinely apologetic about the limitations of his antho -
logical and pedagogical projects, as for instance in the Guide to Kulchur : 
 Introduction  11
“Despite appearances I am not trying to condense the encyclopedia into 
200 pages. I am at best trying to provide the average reader with a few 
tools for dealing with the heteroclite mass of undigested information 
hurled at him daily and set to entangle his feet in volumes of refer -
ence.”38 As he writes in the ABC of Reading , “W e live in an age of science 
and abundance. . . . The weeder is supremely needed if the Garden of 
the Muses is to persist as a garden.”39 In some sense Pound spent his 
entire career trying to condense his own personal mental encyclopedia 
for his readers—  from his early writings on troubadour poetry to the late 
Cantos , Pound’s writings (with the important exception of his Imagist 
poems) are overloaded with historical detail. I. A. Richards famously 
claimed that T. S. Eliot was able to make The W aste Land  “equivalent  
in content to an epic” through his use of allusion.40 Could The Cantos  
and The W aste Land  be considered epics of sampling or of data com -
pression? Perhaps designating them as such undervalues their contents. 
On the other hand, in some sense both are elaborate pastiches which 
thematize their own fragmentation as well their own inability to make 
tradition(s) “cohere.”
The Cantos  and The W aste Land  present versions of a world overbur -
dened by factual history, and yet threatened at the same time by a loss 
of authentic cultural tradition. Pound especially had a tortured rela-  
tion to emergent media forms, most notoriously radio. On one wartime 
broadcast, he claimed, “The press, your press, is a machine for destroy -
ing the memory, the public memory.”41 As it was for Eliot, for Pound the 
mass media was generally antithetical to “tradition.” Eliot’s “dissociation 
of sensibility” occurs in the seventeenth century when poets find them -
selves no longer capable of “constantly amalgamating disparate experi -
ence.”42 Like the metaphysical poet in Eliot’s account, the contemporary 
knowledge worker who suffers from overload proves incapable of “con -
stantly amalgamating disparate experience.” Increasingly over the course 
of the century, the poet was a white-  collar office worker, sometimes 
even thematizing conditions of work and distraction in the workplace.43 
As JoAnne Y ates and Alan Liu have shown, T aylorist procedures were 
introduced into white-  collar offices not long after they were introduced 
in factories.44 The primary obstacle to white-  collar efficiency, to em-  
ploy an anachronism, was what we would think of as “multitasking.” 
The T aylorist/Fordist response to the distracted worker is to reduce 
the number of tasks assigned to each worker. The distracted knowledge 
12 Introduction
worker is typically an insufficiently specialized knowledge worker; the 
non-  specialized (and hence distractible) worker became increasingly 
anathema over the course of the twentieth century. Concomitantly over 
the course of the century, as the conceptual artist Ian Burn noted in the 
early 1980s, intellectuals and artists underwent a process of “deskill -
ing.”45 From the ready-  mades of Marcel Duchamp to the Statements  of 
Lawrence Wiener, art arguably became information as opposed to craft.
If high modernist poets could envision themselves as critics as well  
as victims of the discontinuous time of distraction in the workplace,  
it became more difficult for postwar writers to position themselves  
outside the continuous stream of data and distraction.46 Whereas high 
modernist poets tended to quote high cultural sources in discrete units, 
more recent techniques of appropriation suggest that such selective 
methods of quotation have lost their force within contemporary media 
culture. Rob Fitterman describes his writing practice as follows:
For me, using appropriation—  either wholesale or in smaller sampled units 
(no hierarchy here)—  intersects several current conversations about con -
sumerism, art and technology, readership, etc.  . . . By replacing or meshing 
“authentic” text with found text, I hope to highlight a parallel disparity 
between the object and the commodified object (Buchloh). Significantly 
reduce eDiscovery processing costs by culling and reducing the amount of data 
collected prior to submission to costly processing.  This is, in part, why I do 
what I do—  not to replicate or exploit the original, but to turn up the vol -
ume on its difference as we drag these materials into our own expressions 
and carve our paths through the informational morass.47
Fitterman’s appropriation technique calls into question the authenticity 
of any text in a society dominated by information. But although Fitter -
man describes our current condition as “the informational morass,” he 
does not nihilistically suggest that there is nothing we can do about it. 
On the contrary, he suggests that updated defamiliarization techniques 
might allow for recognizing new ways of navigating an increasingly 
commodified infosphere.
Perhaps the most iconic avant-  garde poem of information overload is 
Raymond Queneau’s 1961 One Hundred Million Million Poems , in which 
ten sonnets can be combined to form 1014 possible sonnets. According 
to François Le Lionnais, “Queneau calculated that someone reading the 
 Introduction  13
book 24 hours a day would need 190,258,751 years to finish it.”48 This 
works out to 2.7 million human life spans at seventy years each. So 
demanding was the project of writing the poem(s) that Queneau sought 
the assistance of Le Lionnais, a mathematician, thereby inaugurating the 
Oulipo (or Ouvroir de littérature potentielle,  the influential Paris-  based 
literary collective that remains active to this day). Queneau’s poem par -
ticipates in the information sublime at the same time that it adheres to 
most of the conventions of the classical sonnet. In accomplishing this 
fusion of the finite sonnet with the infinitude of the machine, Queneau 
literalizes two of William Carlos Williams’s most famous statements: 
“ A poem is  . . . a machine made of words,” and “T o me all sonnets say  
the same thing of no importance.”49 No final meaning can be assigned  
to a poem whose very parameters exceed the attentional capacities of  
its readers. But this is not to say that the poem is without meaning. In  
a 1938 essay, “W ealth and Limit,” Queneau expressed strong concerns 
about an overabundance of information: “ A finite individual cannot, in 
a finite amount of time, amass an infinite quantity of knowledge (facts).”50 
For Queneau, “By reading many books one can accumulate wealth, but 
in order to be truly rich you must renounce wealth; you must renounce 
what Goethe called ‘infinite detail.’”51 One means by which Queneau 
aspired to renounce the wealth of information to be found in poetry 
and in literary history was to undertake to “haikuify” a sonnet of Mal -
larmé, preserving only its rhyming words. Although One Hundred Mil -
lion Million Poems  at first appears to be a limitlessly expansive work, one 
might also read it as focusing the reader’s attention on the most funda -
mental attributes of the sonnet form. Reduction and multiplication both 
function in Queneau’s work as responses to a culture in which “to con -
sult [the Larousse de XXe Siècle ], or any catalogue, or any bibliography, 
is to learn nothing.  . . . No one reads the original works any longer, and 
if they do glance at them, it’s only for a quick look at the index or the 
table of contents.”52
In common with the writers discussed at greater length in the indi -
vidual chapters of this book, Queneau sees the accumulation of special -
ized information as having reconfigured the ways in which literary texts 
are created and experienced. He does not, however, react to this trans -
formation with nostalgia, but rather with a renewed attention to poetic 
form . It is important to stress that this is a book about information over -
load in relation to the forms taken by avant-  garde writing; this is not a 
14 Introduction
comprehensive study of information overload as a general phenomenon, 
nor does this study engage with the “mainstream” tradition in American 
poetry. Marjorie Perloff offers a succinct rationale for why more tradi -
tional poets do not fall under my purview: “The most cursory survey of 
contemporary poetics would show that, at least as far as what Charles 
Bernstein calls ‘official verse culture’ is concerned, technology, whether 
computer or the video, audio, and print media, remains, quite simply 
the enemy, the locus of commodification and reification against which a 
‘genuine’ poetics discourse must react.”53 This dichotomy between a 
media-  philic poetic avant-  garde and a media-  phobic “official verse cul -
ture” is perhaps overstated. Nonetheless, after much searching I have 
found very little mainstream poetry that engages issues of information 
saturation, either on the level of form or content. As this study argues, 
one of the distinguishing features of the poetic avant-  garde has been its 
ongoing engagement with changing technologies of information and 
communication. That engagement has taken many forms, arguably even 
reshaping our understanding of what qualifies as poetry.
The Case Against Information Overload
A number of strong objections have been made to the term “information 
overload.” The most common objection is made from the perspective of 
what Bruce Sterling calls “the Whig theory of technological history,”  
in which “all technological developments have marched in progressive 
lockstep  . . . to produce the current exalted media landscape.”54 Along 
these lines, the graphic design guru Edward T ufte succinctly rejects the 
term on organizational grounds: “It is not a matter of how much infor -
mation there is, but rather how effectively it is used.  . . . Information 
overload? .  . . Clutter and confusion are failures of design, not attributes 
of information.”55 The extraordinary growth of Apple, Microsoft, and 
Google over the past two decades would lend considerable credence to 
T ufte’s claim: the success of these three iconic corporations resulted in 
large part from their ability to make computers more user-  friendly. By 
creating powerful, easy-  to- use interfaces, they became among the larg -
est and most influential American multinational firms within a remark -
ably short time. In his book Interface Culture , Steven Johnson presents  
a particularly Whiggish late-  1990s view of the power of interfaces to 
combat information overload: “The great surge of information that has 
 Introduction  15
swept across our society in recent years looks genuinely innocuous next 
to the meticulous anarchy of real bit-  space  . . . But we see almost noth -
ing of that universe because we have built such sturdy mediators to 
keep it separate from us  . . . What differentiates our own historical 
moment is that a symbolic form has arisen designed precisely to coun -
teract  . . . fragmentation and overload with synthesis and sense-  making. 
The interface is a way of seeing the whole.”56 Johnson does not offer a 
direct refutation of the term “information overload,” but his point is 
clear: well-  designed interfaces largely negate the problem of informa -
tion overload. Johnson suggests that we need blinders to function effi -
ciently, and he optimistically concludes that interfaces can restore to us 
a quasi-  Hegelian organic wholeness. How information is filtered may 
be the key question surrounding information overload—  I am uncon -
vinced, however, that improved interfaces can address all, or even most, 
of the epistemological and aesthetic issues that surround information 
overload.57
In his The Wealth of Networks , Y ochai Benkler terms information 
overload “the Babel objection.” Benkler champions a collaborative recep -
tion version of the wiki model when he suggests that “the Babel objec -
tion is partly solved  . . . by the fact that people tend to congregate around 
common choices.”58 A greater amount of information should bring with 
it a greater array of choices, but it should also provide metadata on the 
popularity and utility of those choices. Benkler places primary impor -
tance on editing and filtration, and notes, “The core response to the 
Babel objection  . . . is to accept that filtration is crucial to an autono -
mous individual.”59 Benkler suggests a related paradox in that perhaps 
the most effective way to counteract information overload would be to 
increase Internet concentration—  that is, reduce the number of filters or 
content providers. This would however generally be antithetical to the 
liberal democratic desire for a diversified media and telecommuni  cations 
sector. For Benkler, this suggests that “to the extent that concerns about 
Internet concentration are correct, they suggest that information over -
load is not a deep problem.”60
An exemplary display of pro and contra positions concerning infor -
mation overload took place in 2005 when the playwright Richard Fore -
man wrote in a statement for his play The Pancake People; or, The Gods 
Are Pounding My Head  that “we are becoming ‘pancake people’—  spread 
wide and thin as we connect with that vast network of information 
16 Introduction
accessed by the mere touch of a button.”61 A somewhat unlikely defender 
of the W estern humanistic tradition, Foreman lamented the loss of “a 
tradition of W estern culture in which the ideal (my ideal) was the com -
plex, dense and ‘cathedral-  like’ structure of the highly educated and 
articulate personality—  a man or woman who carried inside themselves 
a personally constructed and unique version of the entire heritage of the 
We s t .”62 By contrast, Foreman wrote, “today, I see within us all (myself 
included) the replacement of complex inner density with a new kind of 
self-  evolving under the pressure of information overload and the tech -
nology of the ‘instantly available.’”63 In response, the computer scientist 
and pioneering artificial intelligence researcher Marvin Minsky scoffed 
at such claims:
Mr. Foreman complains that he is being replaced (by “the pressure of in-  
formation overload”) with “a new self ”  . . . I think that this is ridiculous 
because I don’t see any basic change; there always  was too much informa -
tion. Fifty years ago, if you went into any big library, you would have been 
overwhelmed by the amounts contained in the books therein.  . . . 
So, in my view, it is not the gods, but Foreman himself who has been 
pounding on his own head. Perhaps if he had stopped longer to think,  
he would have written something more sensible. Or on second thought, 
perhaps he would not—  if, in fact, he actually has been replaced.64
Minsky is in some sense correct to point to the long history of informa -
tion overload, as well as to point to the comical implications of Foreman 
having been replaced by something like an “inforg” avatar. Nonetheless, 
Minsky is surprisingly tone deaf to the increasing urgency of claims 
such as Foreman’s. That information overload has always existed, or  
has been nearly coterminous with literacy, should not necessarily lead 
us to ignore the more recent history of the term over the past several 
decades. The digitally networked human may be far from a cyborg or an 
automaton—  and yet surely the quantity of data available instantane -
ously has radically changed human behavior, particularly when it comes 
to accessing and producing cultural artifacts and literary texts.
The strongest objection to the term information overload, in my 
view, is that it implies an inherently antidemocratic attitude toward the 
production of information at the same time that it suggests a rejection 
of popular and mass culture. According to Mark Poster, “Complaints 
 Introduction  17
that the net inundates everyone with information overload should be 
understood as the statement of those who are comfortable with earlier 
restrictions on who speaks, to whom, when, as well as with the content 
of what may be said.  . . . It is pointless to bemoan or to celebrate the new 
conditions; one must instead work to comprehend critically their limits 
and affordances.”65 While I agree with Poster that information overload 
should not necessarily be seen in utopian or dystopian terms, I am less 
certain that the problem can so simply be attributed to anxieties about 
the masses gaining a voice. Complaints about the inundation of books 
have existed at least since the advent of print culture. It represents an 
epochal shift that most Internet users can at a moment’s notice publish 
their opinions globally on a blog. But historically the term information 
overload would seem to be much more closely connected to another  
of Poster’s objections to the term: “The discourse of the data flood, we 
might call it, presumes a psychophysiological model that is question -
able: humans must have a limited ability to absorb external sensations, 
and the Internet is hogging too much brain space.”66 Here we encoun-  
ter a considerable difficulty, since there is much disagreement among 
neuroscientists, management experts, and humanists as to the limits of 
our cognitive ability to process large quantities of information.
Attention: The Limits of the Human Processor
Jonathan Crary, following the lead of Beniger and others, has suggested 
that in the late nineteenth century new technologies of reproduction 
and communication—  as well as the professionalization of fields such as 
psychology within research universities—  created a cultural crisis sur -
rounding questions of attention and distraction: “It is in the late nine -
teenth century, within the human sciences and particularly the nascent 
field of scientific psychology, that the problem of attention becomes a 
fundamental issue. It was a problem whose centrality was directly related 
to the emergence of a social, urban, psychic, and industrial field increas -
ingly saturated with sensory input. Inattention, especially within the 
context of new forms of large-  scale industrialized production, began to 
be treated as a danger and a serious problem, even though it was often 
the very modernized arrangements of labor that produced inattention.”67 
Although he does not use the term “information overload,” Crary sug -
gests that a powerful conflux of social and technological factors coalesced 
18 Introduction
around the issue of attentiveness. In doing so, Crary largely negates or 
sidesteps neuroscientific arguments about the limitations of our brain’s 
processing power. For Crary, it is social pressures, rather than the inher -
ent limitations of the human processor, that define normative patterns 
of concentration and consciousness. He is particularly outspoken in his 
suspicion of the diagnostic category of ADHD (or ADD):
Over the last few years we have been reminded of the durability of atten -
tion as a normative category of institutional power, in the form of the dubi -
ous classification of an “attention deficit disorder” (or ADD) as a label for 
unmanageable schoolchildren and others. Without entering into the larger 
issue of the social construction of the illness, what stands out is how atten -
tion continues to be posed as a normative and implicitly natural function 
whose impairment produces a range of symptoms and behaviors that vari -
ously disrupt social cohesion.  . . . Of course, one distinction that separates 
contemporary discussions from those of a century ago is the insistence that 
ADD is not linked to any weakness of the will, and there is no personal 
responsibility involved.68
Crary is right to suggest that the ongoing attention crisis and the prob -
lem of information saturation have in a sense become self-  fulfilling proph -
ecies of the era of industrial (or postindustrial) production. Basex, for 
instance, demonstrates that those who attempt to remedy the problem 
are often major players in hyping the problem. But even if the same is 
true with regard to ADHD, there exists a considerably greater body of 
research on the side of psychiatrists and neuroscientists than on the 
side of those humanists and others (e.g., members of the Church of 
Scientology) who have cast aspersion on the diagnostic category. Crary 
describes ADHD as a “dramatic expansion of another layer of disci -
plinary technology—  the sweeping use of potent neurochemicals as a 
strategy of behavior management.”69 As much as I admire the writing  
of Crary and Stiegler, I question their hasty dismissal of a condition 
that is generally said to affect at most between 3 percent and 5 percent 
of the population. According to the psychiatrist Thomas Brown, whose 
book on the topic is fairly representative of the mainstream medico-  
scientific perspective, “The medications used for ADD are among the 
best researched for any disorder.”70 In his Overflowing Brain: Information 
Overload and the Limits of Working Memory , the Swedish neuroscientist 
 Introduction  19
T orkel Klingberg notes that “attention is the portal through which the 
information flood reaches the brain,” and that “working memory is 
essential for controlling the attention. W e have to remember what it is 
we are to concentrate on.”71 According to Klingberg and others, drugs 
such as Adderall and Ritalin have been shown to improve working 
memory by as much as 10 percent. Even if these drugs are overpre -
scribed, particularly to children, it seems excessive to make ADHD a 
central front in the war against what Stiegler labels as “psychopower.”
In his most extensive treatment of ADHD, Bernard Stiegler suggests 
that attention-  destroying technologies and “media-  rich environments” 
have produced “an organological revolution of the life of the mind,” and 
suggests that “in the course of just three generations, this mutation has 
become literally colossal, an almost unimaginable worldwide change.”72 
Recent psychological research has suggested that cognitive behavior has 
adapted since the widespread adoption of the Internet. Preliminary ex-  
periments conducted by a team led by the psychologist Betsy Sparrow 
suggest that “processes of human memory are adapting to the advent of 
new computing and communications technology. Just as we learn through 
transactive memory who knows what in our families and offices, we are 
learning what the computer ‘knows’ and when we should attend to where 
we have stored information in our computer-  based memories.”73 Spar -
row and colleagues acknowledge that there are innate limitations to 
human memory, but they also argue that the cognitive benefits of the 
Internet far outweigh the costs. They conclude that “we are becoming 
symbiotic with computer tools, growing into interconnected systems 
that remember less by knowing than by knowing where the informa -
tion can be found. This gives us the advantage of access to a vast range 
of information, although the disadvantages are constantly being debated. 
It may be no more than nostalgia at this point, however, to wish we were 
less dependent on our gadgets.”74
N. Katherine Hayles has written extensively on ADHD and reading 
practices, and suggests that educators should differentiate between 
“hyper” and “deep” attention. According to Hayles, “Deep attention, the 
cognitive style traditionally associated with the humanities, is charac -
terized by concentrating on a single object for long periods (say, a novel 
by Dickens), ignoring outside stimuli while so engaged, preferring a 
single information stream, and having a high tolerance for long focus 
times. Hyper attention is characterized by switching focus rapidly 
20 Introduction
among different tasks, preferring multiple information streams, seeking 
a high level of stimulation, and having a low tolerance for boredom.”75 
Hayles suggests that “hyper attention” poses a threat to traditional 
methods of education—  but she does not claim that “hyper attention” is 
an unmitigated evil, or a conspiracy to destroy the attention of the 
world’s youth. Like the mainstream tradition in management theory, 
what Hayles is primarily suspicious of is essentially multitasking.76 She 
does not offer a blanket critique of the entire psychiatric establishment, 
and her views are backed by scientific sources. What seems to be most 
at stake in Hayles’s assessment is the continuing value of the contempla -
tive experience of reading. Hayles offers the example of a Dickens novel 
to illustrate her case for “deep attention,” but she does not specify a par -
ticular Dickens novel. Here perhaps an analogy can be made to the 
avant-  garde writing I discuss under the rubric of information overload. 
At least in their initial periodical forms, Dickens’s writings must often 
have competed with other works in something like a “hyper attention” 
mode. Surely A Christmas Carol  is a page-  turner, but what of the noto -
riously unfinishable Bleak House ? It seems to me that despite its length, 
Bleak House  is not, at least in a formal sense, a text that Dickens meant 
to be “read at” rather than read.
The speed at which texts are read is an important corollary of the in-  
formation overload debate—  particularly in the context of literary writ -
ing. “Reading may be classified according to the time it takes up,” Georges 
Perec writes in his supremely classificatory Species of Spaces .77 T an Lin 
(discussed in chapter 6) has recently written that “all reading is format-  
dependent scanning i.e. controlled forgetting.”78 Such claims made about 
poetry have been controversial. Dale Smith and others have recently 
advocated “Slow Poetry” in response to conceptual writing. Smith and 
Goldsmith’s 2009 exchange “The T ortoise and the Hare: Dale Smith and 
Kenneth Goldsmith Parse Slow and Fast Poetries” offers an excellent 
overview of this debate.79 Both Goldsmith and Smith see the Internet as 
profoundly altering reading practices; the premises on which they con -
struct their polemics are particularly revealing. According to Goldsmith 
(who, to be fair, is operating in a provocateur mode), “ Any notion of his -
tory has been leveled by the internet.”80 In response, Smith argues, “The 
only difference between a digital archive and a library is found in the 
different storage capacities and the greater accessibility offered by digi -
tal formats. A ‘truly digital immersion’ doesn’t seem to answer anything 
 Introduction  21
more or less than print immersions—  or the speeded up way of life after 
airplanes and cars or whatever. The human psyche remains at best a kind 
of Paleolithic thing, and there’s a lot of brain research and evolutionary 
biology etc that talks about this.”81 Goldsmith’s notion of an end of his -
tory brought about by the Internet is clearly overstated, as is Smith’s invo -
cation of the prehistoric limitations of human cognition. At the same 
time, their starkly divergent positions reveal a shared emphasis on adapt -
ing poetry either to embrace, or to resist, the acceleration of reading.
The Claudius App: A Journal of Fast Poetry , edited by Jeff Nagy and 
Eric Linsker, provides a platform for contemporary poetry that engages 
new forms of reading and writing. The journal’s fourth issue takes the 
form of an ingenious parody of Poetry Magazine ’s iPhone app. In effect, 
Poetry ’s app (see Figure 3) is a relational database that allows readers  
to choose poems based on moods (e.g., sadness) and topics (e.g., youth). 
The Claudius App IV  (Figure 4) uses the same categories, but leads 
readers to its own content. The Claudius App IV  is not in fact a mobile 
application written for the iPhone, but instead a webpage written in 
HTML that is designed to look like an app. Clicking on the Poetry  app’s 
“More Info” button leads to the banally humanistic statement that “This 
application was created to introduce new audiences to the world of 
poetry.” Clicking on The Claudius App ’s “More Info” button leads to an 
absurdist mash-  up text that begins “The system was marking down,” 
which any diligent reader of postwar American poetry will recognize as 
a parody of the opening line of John Ashbery’s 1970 “The System”: “The 
system was breaking down.”82 While The Claudius App  may be some -
thing of an inside joke, it is also reflective of larger phenomena related 
to the ubiquitous availability of poetry online. Poetry ’s app presumes that 
what draws new readers to poetry are primarily affective and personal 
considerations. The Claudius App ’s parody would seem to suggest that 
it is unlikely that readers will read traditional poetry on their phones. 
Poetry ’s app is, in a sense, built on a paradox: it aims to draw casual 
mobile readers to poetry that can be quickly consumed, and yet the 
poems it draws readers to, for the most part, are traditional contempla -
tive lyrics that seem out of place on an iPhone screen.
Joshua Clover (whose poetry is included in the first issue of The 
Claudius App ) claims that “modern poetry, and free verse in particular, is 
indeed faster” than its pre-  twentieth-  century antecedents.83 For Clover, 
this acceleration suggests an ongoing engagement with technological 
Figure 4.  The Claudius 
App IV: A Journal of Fast 
Poetry  (2013).
Figure 3.  Poetry 
Foundation app (2013).
 Introduction  23
change, as well as with increasingly intensified forms of capitalism. The 
historian Sue Currell has shown that from the late nineteenth century 
onward it became apparent that new technologies would alter the nature 
and speed of reading. Slow reading came to be seen as a contempla-  
tive luxury (and/or a pedagogical necessity); speed reading came to be 
viewed as a modern necessity. Currell describes how speed reading was 
typically disparaged until the 1890s, when new psychological research 
argued that attention was “shown not to decrease with acceleration but 
to sharpen and improve.”84 From the turn of the century to the 1950s, 
speed reading manuals proliferated. While traditionalists might main -
tain that reading quickly was antithetical to literature, even conservative 
modernist critics such as I.  A. Richards felt compelled to experiment 
with speed reading. With his reading machine, Bob Brown (as discussed 
in chapter 2) was arguably parodying the speed reading movement. The 
introduction of mechanized or accelerated forms of reading has, not 
surprisingly, alarmed many.85 For others, such as Brown, new technol -
ogies of reading and writing have also held forth the promise of radi -
cally altering the nature of poetic language, which need not be created 
and received within the confines of a contemplative state free from the 
attractions and distractions of new communications technologies.86
Drawing primarily on the examples of Stein and Cage, the poet and 
critic Joan Retallack suggests that both were centrally concerned with 
reconfiguring the attention of their viewers. In  The Poethical W ager , she 
argues that the “role of the arts seems positively urgent” because “in this 
age of Attention Deficit Disorder, how rare an informed, intense, not to 
say pleasurable connection with anything in our daily lives can be—  the 
effects that this distractedness has on possibility and aspiration.”87 Thus, 
drawing attention to attention, in Retallack’s terms, is akin to an ethical 
(or “poethical”) act. Retallack’s defense of avant-  garde writing as an anti -
dote to distraction ingeniously allows the writing to retain its capacity 
to shock at the same time that it acknowledges that poetry must com -
pete with countless distractions.
The Economics of Attention
In his book (whose lengthy title itself seems designed to frustrate direct 
attention!) plagiarism/outsource, Notes T owards the Definition of Culture, 
Untitled Heath Ledger Project, a history of the search engine, disco OS , Ta n  
24 Introduction
Lin writes, “ An attention span produces things that interest us and not 
the other way around. Thus every attention span is a form of labor whose 
aim is to produce surplus value. W e own our own capacities for produc -
ing attention, in the way that workers once owned arms and legs and 
with them produced iron hoops or steel forks.”88 In fact, Lin is quoting 
without attribution an article by Jonathan Beller titled “Paying Atten -
tion.”89 Have we as readers been paying attention? Did we just pay our 
attention to Lin? Or to someone else? Did we derive something in return 
from the transaction? A quick web search, as every professor knows, is 
the fastest way to catch a plagiarist. Perhaps Lin alludes to this phenom -
enon with his ambiguous titular phrase “a history of the search engine.” 
One effect of Lin’s appropriation tactic is to demonstrate that we have 
very limited ownership when it comes to owning our own attention. T o 
“surf ” the web is perhaps to use our attention in ways that are not neces -
sarily productive. Even so, the waves on which we surf would seem to be 
overwhelmingly located on private beaches.
The management theorist Herbert Simon was perhaps the most 
influential thinker on the economics of attention of the postwar period. 
Simon’s Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-  Making Processes in 
Administrative Organizations  (first published in 1945 and subsequently 
expanded and updated) declares in its most recent, 1997 edition, “The 
central lesson that the computer should teach is that information is no 
longer scarce or in dire need of enhanced distribution. In contrast with 
past ages, we now live in an information-  rich world.  . . . The main require -
ment in the design of organizational communication systems is not to 
reduce scarcity of information but to combat the glut of infor  mation, so 
that we may find time to attend to that information which is most rele -
vant to our tasks.”90 Even before the rise of the personal computer, it was 
clear to Simon that corporations were dedicating a significant propor -
tion of their resources to information management. For the most widely 
praised management text of its kind to make information overload a 
central concern gives an idea of the threat perceived by the managers and 
corporations. In a much-  quoted passage, Simon claimed in 1971 that 
“what information consumes is rather obvious: it consumes the atten -
tion of its recipients. Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty  
of attention, and a need to allocate that attention efficiently among the 
overabundance of information sources that might consume it.”91 Simon 
coined the term “satisficing” to describe “a bounded rationality” in which 
 Introduction  25
in the interest of maximizing utility and efficiency it makes sense not to 
investigate all possible outcomes of a decision. Daniel Kahneman and 
Amos T versky (who, like Simon, also won the Nobel Prize in Economic 
Sciences) suggested further that a greater number of life choices would 
not necessarily make people happier.92 Barry Schwartz terms this the 
“paradox of choice”: when we are confronted by a hundred possible vari -
eties and sizes of toothpaste in the supermarket, we are likely not to 
benefit from devoting extensive attention to our selection process.93 
Happiness, in Schwartz’s view, largely results from the proper alloca -
tion of attention.
Attention economics, the rhetorician Richard Lanham has recently 
argued, is so fundamental to our contemporary world that rhetoric 
deserves to be utterly redefined as a field: “[Rhetoric] has traditionally 
been defined as the art of persuasion. It might as well, though, have 
been called the economics of attention. In a society where information 
and stuff have changed places, it proves useful to think of rhetoric pre -
cisely as such, as a new economics.”94 Lanham and others are grappling 
with a number of complex, interrelated issues. In a society of mass con -
sumption, both of material products as well as of entertainment and 
information, it is often unclear who owns what when it comes to atten -
tion. How should we quantify attention? According to the psychologist 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, attention can be quantified on the level of the 
life span:
It seems that we can manage at most seven bits of information—  such as 
differentiated sounds, or visual stimuli, or recognizable nuances of emo -
tion or thought—  at any one time, and that the shortest time it takes to 
discriminate between one set of bits and another is about 1/18 of a second. 
By using these figures one concludes that it is possible to process at most 
126 bits of information per second, or 7,560 per minute, or almost half a 
million per hour. Over a lifetime of seventy years, and counting sixteen 
hours of waking time each day, this amounts to about 185 billions bits of 
information. It is out of this total that everything in our life must come—  
every thought, memory, feeling, or action.95
For Csikszentmihalyi, it is essential to human happiness that we find 
“flow,” which he defines as sustained concentration. Excessive sensory in-  
put inhibits flow, and detracts from our quality of life. Csikszentmihalyi 
26 Introduction
generally assumes that individuals can create “flow” through effortful 
self-  control—  presuming that individuals are the owners of their own 
attention. Others, who link attention and distraction more closely to 
technology, are less sure that individuals are in control of their atten -
tion. At stake are not only issues of who owns information, but who 
controls the attention required to process information.
If, in a crude version of the Marxist model of exploitation, capital-  
ists continually appropriate the surplus value produced by the physical 
labor of workers, it remains unclear what rights knowledge workers 
have over the products of their intellectual labor. Knowing what rights 
consumers of information have, if any, is even less clear. Whether indi -
viduals have rights to be protected from advertising, data collection, and 
information saturation seems an open question in an era where intel -
lectual property is in flux. Attention, rather than labor, may have become 
the general equivalent—  but the two are of course closely related.96 In 
The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of Modernity , Anson 
Rabinbach chronicles how in the postwar period, “with the declining 
significance of industrial work as a paradigm of human activity and 
modernity, the body no longer represents the triumph of an order of 
productivism.”97 Gradually replacing the industrial age metaphor of the 
human motor were any number of information age metaphors: the 
cyborg, the global brain, the human word processor.98 Such analogies 
are so ubiquitous and generalized as to defy comprehensive description 
here; in the context of information overload what is perhaps most 
important to note is that these analogies almost always have political 
implications in terms of the potential for technology to supplement or 
to supplant human agency.
An Eco-  nomics of Memory:  
Archive Pandemic/Archive Panacea
Despite the pervasive rhetoric of dematerialization that surrounds the 
information age, the topic of information overload seems repeatedly to 
return to questions related to the archive, typically imagined in physical 
terms. Who authorizes its contents? Who filters? Who and what is pre -
served within? Who has access? Who can forget? The purported anar -
chy of the Internet-  as- mega-  archive suggests to many that a crisis of epic 
proportions is underway in terms of literary valuation. In his Gutenberg 
 Introduction  27
to Google: Electronic Representations of Literary T exts , Peter Shillingsburg 
writes of e-  texts that “already information overload has set in. The com -
prehensiveness of the electronic archive threatens to create a salt, estrang -
ing sea of information, separating the archive user from insights into 
the critical significance of textual histories.”99 In a recent essay, Kenneth 
Goldsmith writes that “the blizzard of language is amnesia-  inducing; 
these are not words to be remembered.”100 Goldsmith’s concern is not 
new among poets. As early as 1962, John Ashbery would write crypti -
cally in his influential T ennis-  Court Oath  that
In America the office hid
archives in his
stall . . .101
Whatever this personified “ America the office” is hiding is unclear, as  
if the poet were lost in an infinitely mysterious bureaucratic sublime.  
As is often the case in Ashbery’s poetry, the referents are vague; the poet 
toggles back and forth between fragmentary memories and the immedi -
ate present, and seems forgetful or distracted.102
This book suggests that poets have not been passive victims of the 
pro liferation of information, but rather have actively participated in—  
sometimes benefiting from, sometimes implicitly advocating, sometimes 
resisting—  that proliferation. Poetry’s engagement with information 
technologies constitutes its own emergent textual history. As Derrida 
reminds us, archives are not simply about preserving the past—  they  
are about continuously reconfiguring the future. In Derrida’s terms, the 
archive is really a giant filter, not unlike (in Freudian terms) a colossal 
superego, wherein a culture authorizes its past. Derrida frames the 
question of the archive in economic terms, with recourse to the etymo -
logical sense of the word: “Every archive  . . . is at once institutive and 
conservative. Revolutionary and traditional. An  eco-  nomic  archive in 
this double sense: it keeps, it saves, but in an unnatural fashion, that is 
to say by making the law ( nomos ) or in making people respect the law.  . . . 
It has the force of law, of a law which is the law of the house ( oikos ), of 
the house as place, domicile, family, lineage, or institution.”103 The ques -
tion of the archive, then, is fundamentally a question of the economics 
of memory. What constitutes “an unnatural fashion” of memorializa -
tion? Is the technicization of memory by itself unnatural? Alluding to 
28 Introduction
Aristotle’s distinction between the natural production and accumulation 
of wealth within the household (economics) and the unnatural produc -
tion and accumulation of wealth outside the household (chrematistics) 
through finance capital and other means, Derrida would seem to sug -
gest that insofar as the archive redefines memory through technicizing 
it, then the process of archivization is unnatural. The salient point here 
would be that the archive is not a neutral space of accumulation: rather, 
the archive is to cultural capital what the investment bank is to finance 
capital. The archive is a space of endless revaluation, which both pre -
serves and produces memories far in excess of the interpretive capacities 
of any one archivist or “market maker.”
At the opposite extreme from “archive fever,” there is what could be 
called an “archive panacea” countermovement. The Global Conscious -
ness Project at Princeton could be understood as one such incarnation 
of the notion that the W orld Wide W eb is an evolving “noosphere” (in 
T eilhard de Chardin’s terms).104 Proponents of “archive panacea” tend  
to see the web as a radical social leveler, distributing information to the 
many with few adverse consequences. This might be seen as an extreme 
version of the Whig theory of technological development, which infuses 
the progressive model of information technology with a healthy dose of 
evolutionary fervor. Those who stress the dangers of information over -
load often invoke the “Cro-  Magnon brain” as an analogue to the modern 
human brain.105 Those who champion the advantages of unlimited access 
to information often suggest that in the course of a few generations 
human consciousness has been utterly transformed. From the stand -
point of evolutionary science, both of these positions seem premised on 
questionable sociobiological assumptions. By any respectable measure, 
it should take many generations for the effects of information technol -
ogy to affect the genetic traits of human beings.106
The idea of a totalizing digital archive, however, rather than inspir-  
ing utopian optimism, generally seems to inspire suspicion, if not para -
noia. A poem such as Mel Nichols’s “I Google Myself ” describes, as well 
as performs, the now-  common narcissistic experience of locating one -
self within the global archive of the web.107 (The poem takes the form 
of a parody of the lyrics to the popular song “I T ouch Myself ” by Divi -
nyls.) The global archive offers the possibility that every literate person 
can become an archivist whose archive is available to all with the requi-
site technological means. Craig Dworkin has recently applied the term 
 Introduction  29
“hypermnesia” to the conditions facing the publication and valoriza-  
tion of contemporary poetry. Hypermnesia involves exceptionally vivid 
memo  ries, and yet it also implies a pathological overvaluation of certain 
memories at the expense of others. The archetypal literary hypermnesic 
is Borges’s Funes the Memorious.108 Like “The Library of Babel,” the 
story of Funes has become a central point of reference in discussions  
of information overload. “The certainty that everything has already 
been written annuls us, or renders us phantasmal,” Borges writes in 
“The Library of Babel.”109 Funes’s total memory annuls his ability to 
create anything new, so overwhelmed is he by the complexity of his  
total recall.
Freud, as in the famous analogy of the layers of the city of Rome in 
Civilization and Its Discontents , suggests that in effect we never really 
forget, but rather repress, past experiences. Information overload, we 
might say, results partly from the sense that the archive, like the globe 
itself, is hopelessly overpopulated with memories.110 Around the same 
time that information overload was becoming a widely circulated term 
in the late 1960s and early 1970s, concern about overpopulation also 
began to take on new urgency.111 Even earlier, Stein, Brown, and Olson 
all demonstrated concern with human overpopulation—  or at least with 
overpopulation’s sociological corollary, the problem of anomie. French 
curator and art critic Nicholas Bourriard has placed under the banner 
of “postproduction” art a body of work that specifically engages a world 
overpopulated with art objects:
Since the early nineties, an ever increasing number of artworks have been 
created on the basis of preexisting works; more and more artists interpret, 
reproduce, re-  exhibit, or use works made by others or available cultural 
products. This art of postproduction seems to respond to the proliferating 
chaos of global culture in the information age, which is characterized by an 
increase in the supply of works and the art world’s annexation of forms 
ignored or disdained until now. These artists who insert their own work 
into that of others contribute to the eradication of the traditional distinc -
tion between production and consumption, creation and copy, readymade 
and original work. The material they manipulate is no longer primary . It is 
no longer a matter of elaborating a form on the basis of a raw material but 
working with objects that are already in circulation on the cultural market, 
which is to say, objects already informed  by other objects.112
30 Introduction
The archive, as we know, is continually expanding and can never be 
total. As defined by Foucault, the archive is more like a living language 
than it is like a dead one:
The archive  . . . defines a practice that causes a multiplicity of statements  
to emerge as so many regular events, as so many things to be dealt with and 
manipulated. It  . . . does not constitute the library of all libraries, outside 
time and place; nor is it the welcoming oblivion that opens up to all new 
speech the operation field of its freedom: between tradition and oblivion, 
it reveals the rules of a practice that enables statements both to survive and 
to undergo regular modification. It is the general system of the formation 
and transformation of statements.113
What Hal Foster has called the “archival impulse” does not, then, imply 
an end of history, but rather a proliferation of histories. It is to Foucault 
that we largely owe the critical–  theoretical notion of the singular 
“archive,” and yet Foucault was careful to avoid the conventional polarity 
of the archive-  as- total-  oblivion versus the archive-  as- total-  memory. T o 
define the archive as “a general system of the formation and transfor -
mation of statements” is admittedly vague, but as a definition it fits well 
with the notion of an electronic archive that is continually expanding. 
One of Bourriard’s most crucial claims is that postproduction art goes 
beyond appropriation art in that the works are premised on an ideal of 
sharing rather than of individual ownership. Postproduction art is drawn 
from what is in effect a giant global archive of images, ideas, and sounds. 
Such an archive is open to all who know where to look, and how to bor -
row without stealing (or without getting caught).
Among the archive’s paradoxes is that it preserves memories in bulk, 
but that very bulk threatens to alter, if not obviate, the significance of 
those memories. The hypermnesiac archive, in Dworkin’s description, 
“remains a destructive accumulation, a bibliographic potlatch in which 
the survival of books—  books and not merely their ‘content’—  can only 
be guaranteed by their destruction.”114 Archive fever, as a version of in-  
formation overload, results from a hypertrophy of stored data, and forces 
us to continually bridge the distance between data and knowledge, per -
ception and meaning, lived memory and artificial memory. Nietzsche  
is conspicuously absent from Archive Fever , although he is perhaps  
Derrida’s central philosophical influence. In many respects, Nietzsche’s 
 Introduction  31
“Utility and Liability of History” is more prescient of current debates 
about information saturation than are the texts of Freud—  given that the 
unconscious generally plays a small role in contemporary discussions of 
information overload, and given also Freud’s tendency to assume that it is 
internally stored memory, as opposed to external written memory, that 
overwhelms our sensorium. In the immediate aftermath of the Franco-  
Prussian W ar, Nietzsche noted that the war had “already been trans -
formed into a hundred thousand pages of printed paper.”115 For Nietzsche, 
the increasing availability of historical data was anathema to heroic indi -
vidualism, indeed to individualism of any kind: “The modern human 
being drags around with him a huge number of indigestible stones of 
knowledge, which then on occasion, as in the fairy tale, make quite a 
racket inside his stomach. This racket betrays the fundamental charac -
teristic of this modern human being: the remarkable antithesis between 
an interior that corresponds to no exterior and an exterior that corre -
sponds to no interior—  an antithesis unknown to peoples of the ancient 
world. Knowledge consumed in excess of hunger—  indeed, even contrary 
to one’s need—  now no longer is effective as a shaping impulse.”116 Stuffed 
with knowledge, the human being is bloated to the point of shapelessness. 
Nietzsche’s metaphors are of food, not of drowning, and the message is 
that the inwardness we take to be founded on historical knowledge is in 
fact no inwardness at all. Rather than the individual devouring knowl -
edge in the archive, the individual is devoured by the archive. 
According to the ideals of classical humanism, one could never know 
too much. But perhaps at the very moment God died, He returned with 
infinite technologies to preserve all human knowledge, whatever its 
actual worth. For Nietzsche, information inundation is a matter of life 
and death: “Historical knowledge constantly flows into [modern man] 
from inexhaustible sources; alien and disconnected facts crowd in upon 
him; his memory opens all its gates and is still not open wide enough; 
nature struggles as best it can to receive, order, and honor these alien 
guests, but they themselves are involved in a struggle with one another, 
and it seems necessary to overpower and subdue them all if he himself 
is not to perish as a result of their struggle.”117 Whereas for Nietzsche, 
the flood threatens to overwhelm us with historical data, for most con -
temporary observers information overload threatens to overwhelm us 
with present data, with the latest news rather than with ancient history. 
Nietzsche personifies facts themselves; in the process of moving from 
32 Introduction
data to knowledge, facts effect the opposite movement in humans: abun -
dant facts turn each person into a mere factoid among factoids. Nietzsche’s 
remark that “our writing tools are also working on our thoughts” is fre -
quently cited in support of arguments that imply technological determin -
ism.118 But it is also true that our thoughts are working on our writing 
tools; the tools have allowed us to produce works of art that would not 
have been possible (or perhaps even conceivable) otherwise.
With electronic memory now ubiquitous, it requires more conscious 
agency to organize and/or delete memories than it does to preserve 
them in bulk.119 T otal memory is rapidly becoming our default mode. 
Bernard Stiegler writes that “we are in constant relation with mnemo -
technological apparatuses of all kinds, from televisions and telephones 
to computers and GPS navigation systems. These cognitive technolo -
gies, to which we consign a greater and greater part of our memory, 
cause us to lose ever-  greater parts of our knowledge.”120 For Stiegler, this 
exteriorization of memory results in a situation analogous to the pro -
cess of proletarianization described by Marx: the factory worker needs 
no skills or knowledge of his own to perform his tasks; likewise, the 
consumer or producer of knowledge need not retain a personal store  
of knowledge. The pocket-  size archive fundamentally reconfigures the 
experience of acquiring publicly available information; what its overall 
effects on literature and general human knowledge will be, it seems too 
early to say. The very magnitude of the changes taking place in terms  
of communication and data storage make elaborate prognostications im-  
pos sible. Physical letters, which often constituted the most important 
source of historical information about writers, effectively no longer exist 
as evidence of the beliefs and methods of younger writers. Derrida notes 
the transformation brought about by e-  mail:
Electronic mail today  . . . is on the way to transforming the entire public 
and private space of humanity, and first of all the limit between the private, 
the secret (private or public), and the public or the phenomenal. It is  
not only a technique, in the ordinary and limited sense of the term: at an 
unprecedented rhythm, in quasi-  instantaneous fashion, this instrumental 
possibility of production, of printing, of conservation, and of destruction 
of the archive must inevitably be accompanied by juridical and thus political 
transformations. These affect nothing less than property rights, publishing 
and reproduction rights.121
 Introduction  33
E- mail is both infinitely retrievable as well as radically intangible—  in 
the sense that it carries with it little or no “aura” in Benjamin’s terms. At 
least in part, Derrida was obsessed with the archive in his late writing 
because he was being meticulously archived while still alive—  a situa -
tion common to many well-  known late twentieth-  century intellectuals 
and poets, but a situation that seems increasingly unlikely in an era 
where there are fewer and fewer physical traces of the writing process 
(in the form not just of letters, but also of drafts, notebooks, etc.). At 
the same time, nearly every action one undertakes with a word proces -
sor or a web browser leaves behind a considerable trail of metadata 
(time saved, time accessed, etc.). How much value are we to place on 
minutely recorded data that has hitherto not been considered worth 
preserving? As with so much else, questions of memory and interpre -
tation ultimately come down to questions of control and meaning. The 
unit of the book remains the preeminent literary filter—  whether that 
will remain the case in the future is a question beyond the scope of the 
printed document you hold before you.
The Copiousness of Metadata and  
the Convergence of Media
In The Making of Americans , Stein envisions a kind of modernist T otal 
Information Awareness to be brought about by the sheer comprehen -
siveness of her epic novel: “Soon there will be a history of every kind of 
men and every kind of women and every way one can think about them. 
Soon there will be a history of every man and every woman and every 
kind of being they ever have or could have in them.”122 Her words bring 
to mind the conceptual artist Douglas Huebler’s claim that “one of the 
great things that holds a culture together is redundancy of informa -
tion.”123 Character, for Stein, is deeply based in habit, which is to say  
in repeated actions and behaviors. T ypically we understand repeated, 
habitual activities in pejorative terms. But as Huebler suggests, in infor -
mation theoretical terms redundancy is necessary to convey meaning. 
Other influential modernists, such as Flaubert, were more alarmed at 
the growing redundancy of stored information and its effects on human 
character.
If there were an ur-  text of information overload, it would have to  
be Bouvard and Pécuchet.  In Raymond Queneau’s words, “Our helpless 
34 Introduction
autodidacts are flummoxed by tides of contradictory information, com -
peting theories, and unverifiable assertions.”124 Flaubert, as is well-  known, 
read fifteen hundred volumes as background research. Bouvard and 
Pécuchet are invoked so frequently in discussions of appropriated writ -
ing that referencing them in that context is a cliché in itself. If there 
were an entry for “information overload” in the Dictionary of Received 
Ideas  (inventing new definitions for it is almost another cliché!), it might 
read, “ An affliction from which this author suffers greatly.” Bouvard and 
Pécuchet bear witness to a vicious circle of exponentially expanding  
textuality from which they and their creator cannot escape (“Printing 
press” is defined as “ A marvelous discovery. Has done more harm than 
good”).125 In their failure to complete their classification scheme, our 
heroes are, in the words of Craig Dworkin, like “interfaces to the prolif -
erating database of printed matter in the Troisième République.”126 In 
the fragmentary Chapter 11 (the last Flaubert wrote) of Bouvard and 
Pécuchet , our heroes undertake to “copy haphazardly, whatever falls in 
their hands, all the papers and manuscripts they come across, tobacco 
packets, old newspapers, lost letters, believing it all to be important and 
worth preserving.”127 The copyists return to their original vocation with 
even greater gusto now that it is an avocation. “But soon they feel the 
need to make some sort of classification.”128 Presumably the two believe 
they will someday be able to retrieve their data—  and thus they begin to 
construct a classification system, to undertake a “Dictionary of acquired 
ideas. Catalogue of fashionable ideas.” Even poetry (which is defined  
as “Utterly useless. Out of fashion”) is to be reduced to the level of  
mere bureaucratic data: “The manuscripts of Marescot’s clerk = poetic 
passages.”129
The ease with which text and music can now be produced, copied, 
and exchanged has spawned an important body of recent critical writ -
ing which places in question the nature of intellectual property. Kenneth 
Goldsmith’s preface to Against Expression: An Anthology of Conceptual 
Writing  claims, convincingly to my mind, that the recent surge in appro -
priation writing is a response to unprecedented textual abundance. “Why 
are so many writers now exploring strategies of copying and appropria -
tion?” he asks. “It’s simple: the computer encourages us to mimic its 
workings. If cutting and pasting were integral to the writing process, we 
would be mad to imagine that writers wouldn’t explore and exploit those 
functions.”130 For Goldsmith, “With the rise of the Internet, writing is 
 Introduction  35
arguably facing its greatest challenge since Gutenberg. What has hap -
pened in the past fifteen years has forced writers to conceive of language 
in ways unthinkable just a short time ago.”131
Marcus Boon’s In Praise of Copying  (which was originally envisioned 
as a collaboration with Goldsmith, and is incidentally being given away 
for free online by Harvard University Press) links copying to copia , the 
abundant style. Boon suggests that copies are “markers of the dangers  
of an excess that needs to be controlled.”132 For Boon, “Copia involves a 
movement of forms and energies that is antithetical to that of private 
property—  from the point of view of form—  inherently multiple, exces -
sive, and abundant.”133 Boon argues for a complete overhaul of the exist -
ing global understanding of copyright and intellectual property, and  
he suggests that copia has a role to play in that process. For Erasmus, 
copia is synonymous with variety and plenitude. According to Ann 
Blair, “References to the abundance of books appeared well before the 
early modern period, whether cast favorably (as cornucopian abundance) 
or unfavorably (as overabundance).”134 Copia recasts information abun -
dance in favorable terms; famously, Erasmus offers two hundred varia -
tions on a single sentence. However much irony may have gone into  
his project, Erasmus was confident that language could be artfully  
constructed and systematically taught, in part by means of exercises. 
Erasmus values both inventio  and imitatio , encouraging the artful use  
of commonplaces. Copia, in the sense of constrained variation, could 
also be considered an important technique of twentieth-  century avant-  
garde writing, with Raymond Queneau’s Exercises in Style  serving as 
perhaps its best-  known example.
As Bouvard and Pécuchet discover, archiving the results of their copy -
ing requires that they create a classification scheme: effective data stor -
age necessitates the creation of effective metadata protocols. Drawing 
on Derrida, Dworkin writes that “by archiving books, the archive itself 
adds to their bibliographic information.”135 As Dan Graham’s “Schema” 
(discussed in chapter 6) shows, every iteration of a text alters (if ever  
so slightly) its form—  as well as creating (perhaps largely insignificant) 
new metadata about the conditions of its reception. In Derrida’s de-  
scription, the archive is ever expanding: “By incorporating the knowledge 
deployed in reference to it, the archive augments itself, engrosses itself, 
it gains in auctoritatis . But in the same stroke it loses the absolute and 
meta-  textual authority it might claim to have. One will never be able to 
36 Introduction
objectivize it with no remainder. The archivist produces more archive, 
and that is why the archive is never closed.”136 This ever-  expanding 
archive, I would suggest, has elicited an appropriately copious variety of 
responses. Contra Stein, there never will be “a history of every man and 
every woman,” although it is conceivable that there is now recorded data 
about every American presently living—  indeed, one might suggest that 
being an American citizen is legally the antithesis of being sans papiers  
(or the digital equivalent).137 Stored data by itself does not constitute 
history, however. Stein’s total history can only exist in a projected future, 
and Stein’s notion of such a copious history requires a genius figure 
(herself ) to process and filter historical information.
The technicization of memory—  as in Kittler’s description of an undif-  
ferentiated optical/digital media that will absorb all others—  is some -
times taken to signal the death of the author as well as the death of  
literature.138 Kittler writes that “under conditions of high technology, 
literature has nothing more to say. It ends in cryptograms that defy 
interpretation and permit only interception.”139 Against Kittler’s pro -
nouncement, poetries of information overload—  by which I mean poet -
ries (and poetics texts) that relate either formally or historically to 
information saturation—  demonstrate an extraordinary range of innova -
tive responses to changing technological conditions. Rather than accept 
posthistorical pessimism, the poetics of information overload show that 
there are many possible forms, as well as frames of reference, available 
to contemporary poetry. The kinds of poetry discussed in this book ask 
us to rethink our commonly held notions of literary meaning (what was 
there to say that can no longer be said?), our notions of communicative 
transparency (what is the difference between a difficult literary work 
and a cryptogram?), as well as our notions of personhood (how are we 
defined by our access to, and ownership of, information?). Much depends 
on our answers to these questions.
Poetry, that is, continues to have much to say—  too much perhaps  . . . 
371
“READING AT IT”
GERTRUDE STEIN, INFORMATION 
OVERLOAD, AND THE MAKINGS OF 
AMERICANITIS
There is no grammar in opposition but there is if there is omnipresent 
successful intermediation.
— Gertrude Stein, How to Write
There are so many things to say at one time and this is one of them.
— Gertrude Stein, Narration: Four Lectures
In the final paragraph of her last completed composition, “Reflection  
 on the Atomic Bomb,” Gertrude Stein wrote, “Everybody gets so 
much information all day long that they lose their common sense. They 
listen so much that they forget to be natural. This is a nice story.”1 It is 
difficult to see how in 1946 the atomic bomb could have been “a nice 
story,” and “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb” has typically been consid -
ered a peripheral late work. But I would counter that, despite its brevity 
and its opacity, it is an important final statement of Stein’s attitudes 
toward technology, information, and epistemology. For Stein, the bomb 
“is not at all interesting, not any more interesting than any other 
machine, and machines are only interesting in being invented or in what 
they do, so why be interested.  . . . That it has to be secret makes it dull 
and meaningless.”2 Stein’s response to the bomb is quiescent, but it is also 
skeptical, in the sense of suspending judgment (and consequently fear) 
in the face of a multiplicity of unforeseeable outcomes. In the imme -
diate after  math of Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and the Holocaust, Stein 
refrains from apocalyptic pronouncements. Rather than make a direct 
38 “Reading at It”
proclamation on the nature of the bomb, she offers a reflection on how 
saturated the world is not only with information, but also with fear: 
“There is so much to be scared of so what is the use of bothering to  
be scared.”3 Though it may now sound like something of a truism, 
Stein’s statement “Everybody gets so much information all day long that 
they lose their common sense” bears a complex relation to her life and 
work. After exploring Stein’s attitudes toward information abundance 
at length, I return to “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb” at the conclusion 
of this chapter.
It is tempting to imagine Stein having read V annevar Bush’s influen -
tial “ As W e May Think” in the July 1945 issue of the Atlantic Monthly . 
“ As W e May Think” is the most significant and widely read article on 
the growing problem of information saturation in the immediate post -
war period.4 The Atlantic  figured prominently in Stein’s career—  its 
serial publication of the Autobiography  introduced her to a mass audi -
ence. The Atlantic  also published B.  F . Skinner’s attack on her in 1934,  
as well as publishing her “The Winner Loses: A Portrait of Occupied 
France” in 1940. Stein might also have encountered an abridged version 
of Bush’s article in the September 10, 1945, issue of Life; eerily, Stein’s 
article “Off W e All W ent to See Germany” appeared a month earlier,  
in the August 6, 1945, issue.5 “ As W e May Think” explores the role of 
scientists in the war, and suggests “it is the physicists who have been 
thrown most violently off stride” by “the making of strange destructive 
gadgets.”6 The last sentence of Bush’s introduction in the Atlantic  had 
originally read “Now, as peace approaches, one asks where [scientists] 
will find objectives worthy of their best.”7 The Life version omitted the 
phrase “as peace approaches.” What preoccupied Bush most centrally 
were the new requirements and possibilities for information storage and 
retrieval that emerged from the war effort. Bush proposed the “Memex,” 
a proto-  computer filing system, as a means by which scientific and prac -
tical knowledge might be indexed in order to address the problem of 
information overload.8 The central problem facing researchers is that 
“there is a growing mountain of research. But there is increased evidence 
that we are being bogged down today as specialization extends. The 
investigator is staggered by the findings and conclusions of thousands of 
other workers—  conclusions which he cannot find time to grasp, much 
less to remember, as they appear.”9 Though there is no evidence that 
Stein was aware of the emergence of modern computing within the 
 “Reading at It”  39
military projects supervised by Bush, Alan T uring, Norbert W einer, 
and others, “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb” suggests that Stein, too, 
recognized the increasing difficulty of sorting through vast amounts of 
information in the immediate postwar period.
“Information” is an uncharacteristic word in Stein’s earlier writing, 
occurring only three times in The Making of Americans , and rarely 
thereafter. More typically, Stein speaks of knowledge or of knowing. 
Stein’s use of the word “information” in “Reflection” slightly prefigures 
the changing nature of the word in the late 1940s. The philosopher of 
technology Albert Borgmann has argued that “information led an in-  
con spicuous semantic life until in the second half of the twentieth cen -
tury it gradually and at first hesitantly moved to center stage. The birth 
certificate of information as a prominent word and notion is an article 
published in 1948 by Claude Shannon [“The Mathematical Theory of 
Communication”].”10 Even before Shannon’s article appeared, and a mere 
five months after Stein’s death, Norbert Wiener published an eloquent 
letter, also in the Atlantic , which clearly suggested the link between sci -
entific information and atomic destruction: “In the past, the comity of 
scholars has made it a custom to furnish scientific information to any 
person seriously seeking it. However, we must face these facts: The 
policy of government itself during and after the war, say in the bombing 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, has made it clear that to provide scientific 
information is not necessarily an innocent act, and may entail the grav -
est consequences.”11 Wiener’s statement is far more direct and politically 
charged than Bush’s; there is no indication that Stein felt so dire a sense 
of loss or emergency with the atomic bomb, nor that she was so con -
cerned about preserving the secrecy of scientific information. If Stein 
saw information in less apocalyptic terms than W einer, she nonetheless 
was centrally concerned with questions of cognition and epistemology; 
issues of “what one knows” are central to her writing. Barbara Will em-  
ploys the term “epistemophilia” to describe Stein’s aspiration to depict 
“everything in my knowledge” in works such as The Making of Ameri -
cans.12 There is much in Stein’s biography, as well as in her views of his -
tory and industry, to substantiate reading her work through the lens of 
technological change. Steven Meyer has admirably and exhaustively 
described “the correlations of writing and science” in Stein’s work, as  
the subtitle to his Irresistible Dictation  would have it. Drawing in part on 
his research, in what follows I explore the correlations of writing and 
40 “Reading at It”
information in her work. I suggest that Stein’s interest in questions  
of attentiveness and information saturation informs her writing from 
the 1890s to the 1940s. I argue further that Stein resists the gendered 
pathologization of inattention prevalent in late nineteenth-   and early 
twentieth-  century experimental psychology. I make these claims with 
the proviso that Stein’s engagement with questions of attentiveness and 
technological change is multifaceted, and cannot be reduced to a single 
formula. Stein’s writing does not, as is sometimes claimed, reject refer -
entiality altogether in favor of acontextual information (as opposed to 
meaningful knowledge); nor does Stein’s use of repetition emerge solely 
in reaction to new industrial and communications technologies. Stein, 
in short, was not a technological determinist, and yet the influence of 
emergent technologies such as the assembly line, telegraphy, radio, and 
film can be widely felt throughout her writing.
The Makings of Americanitis
Over four decades before “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb,” Stein began 
The Making of Americans — a work that could be said to inaugurate a 
tradition of books that are in some sense impossible to read in a conven -
tional manner due to the demands they make on readers. Stein was to 
remark in Everybody’s Autobiography  that “ The Making of Americans  is a 
very important thing and everybody ought to be reading at it or it.”13 To  
read “at it,” rather than to read “it,” is indicative of Stein’s larger engage -
ment with the growing proliferation of information that characterizes 
the transition to the twentieth century. Sianne Ngai uses The Making of 
Americans  as a touchstone in the “Stuplimity” chapter of her Ugly Feel -
ings precisely because it is “an experiment in both duration and endur -
ance.”14 The Making of Americans , in describing a country “it has taken 
scarcely sixty years to create,” portrays a nation already fatigued by its 
extraordinary industrial success.15 Ngai writes of the experience of read -
ing it: “ As any reader of The Making of Americans  in its entirety can 
attest, the stakes of this astonishing 922-  page narrative are the exhaus -
tion it inevitably induces.”16 For Ngai, in Stein’s writing, “astonishment 
and fatigue, when activated in tandem, come to organize and inform  
a particular kind of relationship between subjects and language.”17 A 
significant component of that “relationship between subjects and lan -
guage,” I want to suggest, is the experience of technological modernity. 
 “Reading at It”  41
In a generalized sense, Stein lived through what James Beniger calls  
the “control revolution” of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centu -
ries, and she did so in the company of some of the period’s most influ -
ential thinkers on questions of knowledge and epistemology—not only 
her teachers William James and Hugo von Münsterberg, but also her 
friends Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead.
In 1903, the year that Stein began The Making of Americans , the Rexall 
drug company introduced the patent medicine “ Americanitis Elixir.”18 
According to the bottle, the solution was “ reco MMeNded By uS for 
Neurasthenia, Nervous Exhaustion and other Conditions of Debility 
arising from Nerve Over-  Strain” (see Figure 5). William James is some -
times credited with having coined the term “ Americanitis” as a synonym 
for neurasthenia (literally “tired nerves”). In fact, neither James nor Stein 
ever specifically used the term “ Americanitis” in print, although James 
can be credited with popularizing a book that did use the term, Annie 
Payson Call’s 1891 Power Through Repose .19 Whereas previous writers 
using the term “ Americanitis” had suggested the phenomenon was pri -
marily climatic, Call and James suggested that neurasthenia had more 
to do with the rapid pace of modern life.20 James praised Call profusely 
in two reviews and in his 1895 talk “The Gospel of Relaxation,” in which 
he wrote, “The American over-  tension and jerkiness and breathlessness 
and intensity and agony of expression are primarily social, and only sec -
ondarily physiological, phenomena. They are bad habits, nothing more 
and nothing less, bred of custom and example, born of the imitation  
of bad models and the cultivation of false personal ideals.”21 Among  
the bad habits induced by neurasthenia was inattention. Jonathan Crary 
notes that in the 1870s and 1890s, “contemporary research on newly 
invented nervous disorders, whether hysteria, abulia, psychasthenia, or 
neurasthenia, all described various weakenings and failures of the integ -
rity of perception.”22
As a student of James and Münsterberg in the 1890s, Stein was ide -
ally situated to witness the widespread pathologization of inattention 
described by Crary:
It is in the late nineteenth century, within the human sciences and particu -
larly in the nascent field of scientific psychology, that the problem of atten -
tion becomes a fundamental issue. It was a problem whose centrality was 
directly related to the emergence of a social, urban, psychic, and industrial 
42 “Reading at It”
field increasingly saturated with sensory input.  . . . It is possible to see one 
crucial aspect of modernity as an ongoing crisis of attentiveness, in which 
the changing configurations of capitalism continually push attention and 
distraction to new limits and thresholds, with an endless sequence of new 
products, sources of stimulation, and streams of information, and then 
respond with new methods of managing and regulating perception.23
James, true to his radical empiricism, was reluctant to blame neuras -
thenia on physiology or innate character. Like Call, and like the coiner 
of the term “neurasthenia” George Miller Beard, James considered the 
inexorable acceleration of modern American life primarily to blame. 
Rather than using their newfound prosperity to float gently down 
James’s “stream of consciousness,” Americans, particularly those of what 
Beard called the “brain-  working class,” were drowning in a flood of  
Figure 5.  Americanitis elixir,  
circa 1903.
 “Reading at It”  43
overstimulation.24 Beard considered neurasthenia so prevalent a dis -
order as to hardly require detailed empirical evidence: “The develop -
ment of nervousness and the increase of functional nervous diseases, 
under whatever names they may be known, have been so great in mod-
ern times, especially in the Northern portions of the United States, that 
there is no need of statistics.”25 Oddly proud of the uniquely American 
nature of the disorder, Beard wrote, “For years, the philosophers of  
both continents have been asking, and in various and inconsistent ways 
have been answering this question, Are nervous diseases increasing? 
and they have gone to the most distant regions and to the far away  
ages for arguments which, when found, did not aid them on either side. 
There is no need of this search, the proofs are all about us; we are over -
loaded, weighed down with excess of evidence; the proof shines so 
strong that our eyes are blinded by its light; it irritates and teases us 
until we are benumbed, and can feel no more.”26 By means of a curious 
circularity, the researcher saturated with evidence becomes the most 
compelling example of the existence of the disorder. It is almost as if to 
recount the “excess of evidence” would be to risk neurasthenic conse -
quences in the reader.
Like James, Beard considered himself to suffer from neurasthenic 
symp  toms. James was particularly concerned about the effects of over -
stimulation on workers: “It is your relaxed and easy worker, who is in  
no hurry, and quite thoughtless most of the while of consequences, who 
is your efficient worker; and tension and anxiety, and present and future, 
all mixed up together in our mind at once, are the surest drags upon 
steady progress and hindrances to our success.”27 Americanitis (or neur -
asthenia), in this description, poses something of a conundrum: how 
can the “dull, unhurried worker” in fact be more productive than the 
“intense, convulsive worker”?28 In James’s proto-  T aylorist account, neur -
asthenia implies that a sustained excess of concentration can paradoxi -
cally result in an inability to concentrate. As Maria Farland writes in 
“Gertrude Stein’s Brain W ork”:
Insofar as an economy increasingly based on knowledge-  work required 
workers with particular mental and psychical traits, its emergence precipi -
tated a corresponding emphasis on the hearts, souls, and minds of these 
new mental workers. In this context, as Michel Foucault has pointed out, 
the focus of attention was no longer the manual laborer—  “the future 
44 “Reading at It”
worker who had to be taught the disciplines of the body”—  but the aspiring 
brain worker, “the schoolboy  . . . who was in danger of compromising not 
so much his physical strength as his intellectual capacity.” As the norma-  
tive gaze shifted its focus from the corporeal body to the inculcation of 
“intellectual capacity,” the primary concern was their mental, rather than 
physiological, attributes.29
Stein’s undergraduate research allowed her to witness firsthand the emer -
gent field of scientific psychology’s near obsession with questions related 
to fatigue and inattention. Retrospectively surveying his field in the 1913 
Psychology and Industrial Efficiency , Münsterberg wrote that “the various 
kinds of fatigue and exhaustion [are] the one field which has been thor -
oughly plowed over by science and by practical life in the course of the 
last decades.”30 The experiments Stein conducted, however rudimentary, 
introduced her to the difficult problem of quantifying human attention, 
in “normal” as well as in fatigued circumstances. As early as her essay 
“Cultivated Motor Automatism” of 1898, Stein began to depart from the 
empirical scientific methods she had been taught and to become inter -
ested instead in character psychology; it was there that Stein first claimed 
that “habits of attention are reflexes of the complete character of the in-  
dividual.”31 Stein considered the claim important enough that she quoted 
herself verbatim (without noting the direct quotation of herself ) in “The 
Gradual Making of The Making of Americans .”32 Stein’s dedication to 
character psychology—  due in large part to her subsequent devotion to 
the theories of Otto W eininger—  has been much lamented by critics.33 
Such criticism is justified as it pertains to Stein’s understanding of sexu -
ality and race—  particularly her depiction of Melanctha.34 But critics 
have not, in my view, given sufficient credit to Stein’s attempt to deploy 
character as a means by which to resist the normativizing tendencies  
of a technocratic society—  particularly in terms of resisting the highly 
gendered discourse of neurasthenia.
Among the most fundamental assumptions of the earlier 1896 “Nor -
mal Motor Automatism” (nominally authored by Stein and Leon Solo -
mons, but in fact written entirely by Solomons) is that “whatever else 
hysteria may be  . . . it is a disease of the attention.”35 Solomons and Stein 
used themselves as the control group in the experiment, claiming to 
“stand as representatives of the perfectly normal—  or perfectly ordi -
nary—  being, so far as hysteria is concerned.”36 Although Stein and 
 “Reading at It”  45
Solomons considered hysteria a disease of the attention, they also saw 
that inatten  tion might play a role in normal cognition as well as in path -
ological cases: “Our problem was to get sufficient control of the atten -
tion to effect [the] removal of attention.”37 Before she left for Johns 
Hopkins, Stein’s notion of “bottom nature,” or innate character, had 
already placed her at odds with the empiricism of James: “One of the 
things I did was testing reactions of the average college student in a 
state of normal activity and in the state of fatigue induced by their 
examinations. I was supposed to be interested in their reactions but 
soon I found that I was not but instead that I was enormously inter -
ested in the types of their characters that is what I even then thought  
of as the bottom nature of them.”38 By the time she had reached Johns 
Hopkins much of the research she had participated in was already out -
dated. Steven Meyer notes that “in 1897, the year Stein entered medical 
school, the English neurophysiologist Charles Sherrington introduced 
the concept of the synapse as ‘an anatomical and functional explanation 
for the mechanism by which the individual neuronal units could com -
municate with each other.’ Hence Stein, in her first two years at Johns 
Hopkins, much of the time spent conducting laboratory research, found 
herself in the midst of a paradigm shift if ever there was one.”39 In learn -
ing of the internal workings of the brain, Stein was far ahead of her 
contemporaries in conceiving of it as an information processor. As Meyer 
describes the importance of her exposure to the concept of the synapse, 
“The crucial thing to note here is that in taking neurons, as described 
by the neuron doctrine, as paradigmatic of organic life (and thereby 
presuming that nerve cells, like other cells, don’t form ‘actual unions,’ or 
organic unities, but are only exceptional in that they ‘do something very 
different from other cells of the body,’ namely, they ‘process informa -
tion’), it becomes necessary to reconceive organicism as a function of 
con tact or contiguity, rather than of organic connection.”40 Stein’s med -
ical studies allowed her to rethink the nature of consciousness and per -
ception in far more mechanistic terms than her contemporaries—  
though she largely rejected such expla  nations, and refrained from using 
technical scientific language. What she retained, according to Meyer, 
was an understanding of an organicism that emphasized “contiguity” 
rather than “connection”—  a distinction that emphasizes that knowl -
edge acquisition is an empirical, as opposed to an intuitive, process. 
Ironically, perhaps, Stein began her scientific work by studying the 
46 “Reading at It”
problem of attention, using herself as a case study in normalcy—  and 
yet through the course of her graduate studies found herself becoming 
increasingly distracted. Whether Stein herself suffered from American -
itis, she in effect partook of the remedy that the disease’s very name 
suggested: she departed for Europe. T om Lutz’s excellent American 
Nervousness, 1903: An Anecdotal History  takes the year in question to be 
indicative of the peak of neur  asthenia as a phenomenon. This was an 
important year for Stein: she completed her first novel, Q.E.D. ; she set -
tled into 27 Rue de Fleurus in Paris; she bought her first Cézanne; and 
she began The Making of Americans .
Q.E.D.  opens with Adele, the Stein character, described as having 
mild neurasthenic symptoms: “The last month of Adele’s life in Balti -
more had been such a succession of wearying experiences that she rather 
regretted that she was not to have the steamer all to herself. It was very 
easy to think of the rest of the passengers as mere wooden objects; they 
were all sure to be of some abjectly familiar type.”41 The American types 
Adele encounters seem to have no identity or bottom nature. Midway 
on her transatlantic passage Adele is transformed by meeting Helen, 
who immediately counteracts Adele’s tendency to yield “to a sense of 
physical weariness and to the disillusionment of recent failures.”42 When 
Adele returns to New Y ork later in the novel, she has a new apprecia -
tion for the pace of American life. Despite the pain of her failed rela -
tionship with Helen, Adele, according to Lutz, “comes to reject the false 
advertising of neurasthenic self-  presentation.”43 In part through over -
coming the symptoms of Americanitis, Adele becomes more masculine: 
“I always did thank God I wasn’t born a woman,” she remarks, scandal -
izing her friend Mabel.44 As Mabel and Adele find themselves increas -
ingly able to enjoy the “habit of infinite leisure,” Helen becomes more 
and more overcome by her “exhausted nerves.”45 And as Adele grows 
stronger and more independent, her relationship with Helen becomes 
increasingly untenable: “When together now they seemed quite to have 
changed places. Helen was irritating and unsatisfying, Adele patient 
and forbearing.”46 T oward the conclusion of Q.E.D. , Helen’s “attitude”  
is described as “a triumph of passivity.”47 Part of what is demonstrated 
in Q.E.D.  is the growing force of Stein’s personality: Adele comes to 
dominate her homosocial milieu, leaving behind the frenetic material -
ism of her native Baltimore and its habit of infinite exhaustion. Thirty 
years later, in The Geographical History of America; or, The Relation of 
 “Reading at It”  47
Human Nature and the Human Mind , she was to write, “I have been told 
that I have always been nervous and unoccupied, that I have never cared 
to fill my time with the things that fill it and as a result I am not likely 
to remember or forget and therefore have I a human mind. Is it because 
of this that I have a human mind.”48 In common with the character of 
Adele, Stein also considered herself to demonstrate systems of neur  as-
thenia, and saw it as (to some extent) constitutive of her character.
Even more so than Q.E.D. , Stein’s later expatriate reflections on 
Ameri  can history demonstrate her attitudes toward the increasing pace 
of American life. Her account of modernity in many respects substan -
tiates Crary’s correlation of attention with the growing disciplinary 
requirements of the late nineteenth century. According to Stein, “The 
eighteenth century began the passion for individual freedom, the end of 
the nineteenth century by conceiving organization began the beginning 
of a passion for being enslaved not so much for enslaving but for being 
enslaved.”49 As it pertains to the Enlightenment, Stein’s account is fairly 
conventional, but as pertains to the late nineteenth century, it is some -
what counterintuitive. Stein seems to be describing the rapid growth  
of bureaucratic knowledge (including perhaps the crucial transforma -
tion of the two research universities she attended) as a “passion for being 
enslaved.” Stein was wary of an overly bureaucratized culture, as she 
later saw it manifested in the New Deal, and saw the United States  
as the most highly organized of all societies: “Spain because of its lack 
of organization and America by its excess of organization were the nat -
ural founders of the twentieth century.”50 Stein was concerned that the 
expansion of organizational knowledge threatened individualism, or as 
she put it, “vital singularity.” In an oft-  quoted passage from The Making 
of Americans , she writes:
I say vital singularity is as yet an unknown product with us, we who in  
our habits, dress-  suit cases, clothes and hats and ways of thinking, walk-  
ing, making money, talking, having simple lines in decorating, in ways of 
reforming, all with a metallic clicking like the type-  writing which is our 
only way of thinking, our way of educating, our way of learning, all always 
the same way of doing, all the way down as far as there is any way down 
inside to us. W e are all the same all through us, we never have it to be free 
inside us. No brother singulars, it is sad here for us, there is no place in an 
adolescent world for anything eccentric like us, machine making does not 
48 “Reading at It”
turn out queer things like us, they can never make a world to let us be free 
each one inside us.51
Stein characterizes American industrial homogenization as utterly stul -
tifying, and yet she implies that individualism itself is a product, rather 
than being innate. The notion of “brother singulars” in the plural verges 
on the oxymoronic; this passage has often been read as a defense of 
same-  sex relationships, which it most certainly is. But it is also an ex-  
pression of Stein’s ambivalence toward the standardization imposed by 
technology. The habitual clicking of the typewriter suggests a complete 
mechanization of all thought. As is well-  known, Alice B. T oklas typed all 
of Stein’s mature manuscripts (most likely including the above words), 
which would make it a scene of writing literally produced by two “queer 
things like us.” Stein beautifully plays off two opposing exaggerations—  
“we are all the same” and yet at the same time we, as “brother singulars,” 
cannot be made by machine. “Queer things like us” cannot be identical 
in the way of machine-  produced objects. Barbara Will aptly remarks of 
The Making of Americans  and Stein’s notions of history and its relation 
to the family and individualism,” “‘History,’ ‘progress,’ and ‘making’ [as 
terms in Stein’s writing] ask us to see ourselves, fundamentally, as our 
fathers’ daughters and sons, as their replicable parts within the great gen -
erational machine.”52 Stein was fascinated by generations as a defining 
unit of historical and personal temporality: the very process of human 
reproduction is made into a mechanistic process in Stein’s account of 
generational change. What fascinated Stein about the American “great 
generational machine” was its comparative newness, as well as its com -
prehensive effectiveness—  especially in shaping character and in direct-
ing the attention.
Stein was both attracted to, and repelled by, American industrial pro -
duction and the increasing organization and standardization it required. 
In Everybody’s Autobiography , she positions her project as anticipatory 
of the assembly line: “In The Making of Americans  I was making a con -
tinuous present a continuous beginning again and again, the way they 
do in making automobiles or anything.”53 And yet in the same work she 
writes of the utter dullness of mass production: “I detach myself from 
the earth being round and mechanical civilizations being over and orga -
nization being dull.”54 Stein was deeply proud of her Americanness, 
 “Reading at It”  49
especially as embodied in her two assembly-  line produced Fords, Aunt 
Pauline and Godiva. In his “Bride of the Assembly Line,” Barrett W atten 
has proposed a strong connection between Stein’s compositional meth -
ods and Fordist production: “Stein’s Ford  . . . is equally a product to  
be consumed and a mode of production, as a new technology, that may 
be admired for its capacity to gain access to and even produce experi -
ence, not just to reify it. T echnology partakes of authorship, and not just 
in terms of a pattern of consumption.”55 W atten suggests further that 
“Stein elaborates a theory of American identity as stemming, not from 
state structures, but from its modern capacity to produce.”56 W atten’s 
reading accounts well for Stein’s fascination with the continuous pres -
ent of industrial production. Stein had the greatest admiration for the 
American capacity for making, and although she seems to have feared 
the effects of such a tremendous capacity for production, she also saw  
it in favorable terms as the central distinguishing feature of the mod-  
ern United States. Germans might be methodical, but they could not, 
for Stein, be either truly modern or truly organized, as she puts it in 
The Autobiography of Alice B. T oklas : “Gertrude Stein used to get furi -
ous when the english all talked about german organization, they had 
method but no organization. Don’t you understand the difference, she 
used to say angrily, any two Americans, any twenty Americans, any mil -
lions of Americans can organize themselves to do something but ger -
mans cannot organize themselves to do anything.”57 Stein presents 
Americans as the most flexible of all peoples in terms of their capacity 
to organize and to reorganize in large numbers—  and yet remains con -
cerned about the effects of such organization on the “bottom nature” of 
Americans. In questioning the science, as well as the pseudo-  science, of 
her day, Stein was arguably making room for more kinds of American 
“bottom nature.”
“Act so that there is no use in a center”:  
The Continuous Present of Partial Attention
One means by which Stein aspired to overcome the complete organiza -
tion of society was to induce states of distraction in her readers.58 As 
she writes in How to Write,  “When a dog is no longer a lap dog there is 
a tempora ry inattention.”59 Or as she puts it in Stanzas in Meditation :
50 “Reading at It”
I have lost the thread of my discourse.
This is it it makes no difference if we find it
If we found it  . . .60
Ellen Berry writes that “Reading Stein’s texts . . . requires a paradoxical 
or split act of attention—  a relaxed hyperattention, an unconscious 
hyperconsciousness, a borderline state of awareness a little like insom -
nia .”61 Barbara Will refers to this as “attentive inattentiveness.”62 The 
reader cannot help but daydream or lose their train of thought when 
confronted by a passage such as the following: “He certainly might have 
been one completely listening to any one explaining this thing why each 
one is doing what each one is doing. He was pretty nearly completely 
listening to any one who was one explaining this thing. He was then one 
sometimes explaining something. He was then sometimes wanting to be 
needing to be needing being one completely explaining everything. He 
certainly listened very much and very often and certainly he very nearly 
completely listened when he listened to very many who were explaining 
everything.”63 David Hersland, rather than listening to , is, in effect, listen -
ing at . W e as readers cannot help but be caught up in the rhythmic repeti -
tion of the aspiration to listen—  but we, too, cannot “completely” read. 
Linda Stone has recently coined the term “continuous partial attention” 
to describe “keeping tabs on everything while never truly focusing on 
anything.”64 According to the neuroscientist Gary Small, “When paying 
continuous partial attention, people may place their brains in a height -
ened state of stress. They no longer have time to reflect, contemplate,  
or make thoughtful decisions. Instead, they exist in a sense of constant 
crisis.”65 For the most part in Stein’s writings, the state of continuous 
partial attention is celebrated, and produces not stress or crisis, but 
rather pleasure and possibly contemplative absorption.
James’s Principles of Psychology  presents a theory of attention that is 
largely unsympathetic to “continuous partial attention.” James recognized 
that one’s variety of attention might change from instant to instant, and 
according to James, “There is no such thing as voluntary attention sus -
tained for more than a few seconds at a time. What is called sustained 
voluntary attention is a repetition of successive efforts which bring back 
the topic to the mind.”66 But, as Lisa Ruddick points out, “it is a mistake 
to think of James’s thoughts on the stream of consciousness as offer-  
ing an implicit model for a diffuse or wandering literary style. That is to 
 “Reading at It”  51
confuse his descriptive and his prescriptive aims.  . . . In James’s scheme 
of things, wandering is the meanest possible use of the mind.”67 It is 
suggestive to compare a subtitle of James’s “ Attention” chapter, “The 
Idea  tional Excitement of the Centre,” with one of Stein’s most famous 
statements, “ Act so there is not use in a center.”68 Quoting a passage 
describing David Hersland, Steven Meyer writes that “Stein aligned 
herself with those for whom, as she described them in The Making of 
Americans , ‘spirituality and idealism have no meaning excepting as mean -
ing completest intensification of any experiencing’; radical empiricists 
all, for whom ‘any conception of transcending experience’ was meaning -
less.”69 “Completest intensification” for Stein would not be identity (a 
thing in relation), but rather entity (a thing not in relation). Stein sought 
to make her writing “really exciting,” but to privilege the “ideational 
excitement of the centre” would be to risk losing sight of the larger pic -
ture—  to privilege a transcendental moment of identification (as Joyce 
perhaps did with his notion of the “epiphany”) over the continuity of a 
present that has no center.
Stein’s notion of the genius’s extraordinary powers of sustained 
attention corresponds closely to the view of genius found in Principles  
of Psychology : “Geniuses are commonly believed to excel other men in 
their power of sustained attention. In most of them, it is to be feared, 
the so-  called ‘power’ is of the passive sort. Their ideas coruscate, every 
subject branches infinitely before their fertile minds, and so for hours 
they may be rapt. But it is their genius making them attentive, not their 
attention making geniuses of them.”70 With the chiasmus of the last 
sentence, James carefully avoids a deterministic equation of genius and 
attention. The central claim of Steinian epistemology that “when you 
know anything, memory doesn’t come in” further radicalizes James’s rad -
ical empiricism by privileging immediate sense data over remembered 
or secondhand data. Barbara Will astutely describes the significance of 
Stein’s notion of a “consciousness without memory,” which
describes a state of immediate, present-  tense distraction where one is 
“watching what one produces only as it is produced.” This is radically 
opposed to what Stein would refer to as a “nineteenth-  century” tradition of 
epistemological inquiry, where the achievement of “knowledge” is predicated 
upon a temporally progressive process of experience and appropriation of 
the “known” on the part of an objective “knower.” In Stein’s reformulation 
52 “Reading at It”
of this relatio nship in the 1930s, “knowledge” based on memory and a  
domination of knower by known has been replaced by a continuously 
present process that keeps in play at once two very different activities:  
production (“motor automatism”) and watchful “knowing” or attentive 
inattentiveness.71
Will’s reading favorably emphasizes the stakes involved in Stein’s radical 
(re)writing of a present in which knower and known, writer and reader, 
are placed in more equitable relation to one another. In his American Lit -
erature and the Destruction of Knowledge: Innovative Writing in the Age of 
Epistemology , Ronald Martin claims, “No writer did more in the business 
of knowledge destruction than Gertrude Stein.”72 Such a reading of her 
as the most radical of epistemoclasts would likely have dismayed Stein. 
Though she may have cherished dismantling received knowledge, “atten -
tive inattentiveness” (or “continuous partial attention”) does not deny 
that we can have access to knowledge; rather, it challenges the patholo -
gization of states in which we have imperfect access to knowledge.
T aylorism, we might recall in this context, was in large part designed 
to prevent worker distraction; to get each thing done as quickly as  
possible, it was necessary to focus worker attention on as few tasks as 
possible.73 According to Münsterberg (a qualified admirer of T aylor), 
“Psychological laboratory experiments have shown in many different 
directions that simultaneous independent activities always disturb  
and inhibit one another.”74 Stein’s use of “continuous partial attention” 
effects precludes such an instrumentalization of direct attention; she 
forces us to lose our train of thought. In effect, we as readers must over -
come our tendency to dismiss repetition and distraction as exclusively 
fatiguing. Distraction can also create effects of surprise and pleasure; 
distraction will not lead to greater efficiency, but it may (contra James) 
lead to greater autonomy. T o put this in mildly flippant terms, for Stein 
distrac  tion builds character. The following passage from Useful Knowl -
edge’s “Wherein the South Differs from the North” ingeniously plays on 
the rhyming pair inattention/intention:
In the middle of attention.
Any more as to the north.
In the middle of inattention.
Any more as to the north.
In the middle as an attention.
 “Reading at It”  53
Any more as to the north.
In the middle as in atten tion.75
It is impossible to hear these variations aloud exactly as they are writ -
ten. By the mere variation of a pronoun, or by the rearrangement of 
syntax, Stein is able to make it impossible for us to pay full attention. 
Neurasthenia, according to Beard and others, was a distinctly northern 
phenomenon. Even so, we cannot locate attention in this passage—  in 
the middle, in the north or in the south. W e can, however, compare 
states of attention to our present state or to past states:
Is it settled.
Settled is it.
In attention as to the south.
Settled is it.
In attention as to the north.
It is settled is.
In attention as to the south.
In attention in intention.76
It—  if it is our attention to attention—  is not a “settled” matter. Atten -
tion must have something to do with intention—  with our ability to 
effect change upon external circumstances. As soon as we stand “in the 
middle of attention,” the middle has shifted. Joan Retallack describes 
how “Stein’s geometry of attention . . . creates a fractal coastline of repet -
itive/permutative linguistic forms whose semantic shape (following the 
permeable, fluid dynamic of any coastline) is constantly shifting in the 
emotional, social, intellectual weather of interpretive space.”77 Retal -
lack’s coastline metaphor is helpful in that it emphasizes how fluid the 
effects of Steinian repetition can be; long stretches of the coastline may 
seem dreary and redundant, until one finds oneself lost “in the middle 
of attention,” most likely as the result of some unforeseen event (or per -
haps nonevent in the case of a momentary distraction).
“Enormous Publicity”: Overpopulation, Media, and the 
Destruction of Attention
Stein tended to view mass communications technologies as antithetical 
to the creatio n of a “continuous present”: “Think of any news that is fit 
54 “Reading at It”
to print it all did happen the day before and once it is the day before it 
might just as well be the week or the month before or the year before.”78 
The time lag in the newspaper’s delivery of news makes it uninterest -
ingly redundant, as opposed to interestingly repetitious: “W ell and what 
should the newspaper do, well sooner or later they will have to redis -
cover to-  day and realize that yesterday is not to-  day.”79 W orse, the news -
paper conveys far too much to too many people indiscriminately: “This 
as I say has been the great problem of our generation, so much happens 
and anybody at any moment knows everything that is happening that 
things happening although interesting are not really exciting. And an 
artist an artist inevitably has to do with what is really exciting.”80 The 
role of the writer is to elevate the ambient information of the media, that 
which is merely interesting, to the level of that which is truly exciting: 
the immediacy of the masterpiece. The instantaneous global transmis -
sion of information only conveys a kind of pseudo-  continuous present—
“the false sense of time of the newspaper world.”81 According to Stein, 
the reason why “the novel as a form has not been successful in the T wen -
tieth Century” is that “no individual you can conceive can hold their 
own beside life. There has been so much in recent years  . . . there was not 
this enormous publicity. People now know the details of important 
people’s daily life unlike they did in the Nineteenth Century. Then the 
novel supplied imagination where now you have it in publicity.”82 Pub -
licity, about which Stein knew a great deal by the 1940s, is for her gener -
ally antithetical to imagination.83 The newspaper makes the past and 
present available, but it has little to say about individual character: “The 
newspapers are full of what anybody does and anybody knows what 
anybody does but the thing that is important is the intensity of any -
body’s existence.”84 Stein saw radio as particularly antithetical to indi -
vidualism and to genuine experience: “T o the T wentieth Century events 
are not important. Events have lost their interest for people. Y ou read 
them more like a soothing syrup, and if you listen over the radio you 
don’t get very excited.”85
Among the indications that Stein considered information excess to be 
a serious problem in the twentieth century is the concern she repeatedly 
expressed about overpopulation, particularly in Everybody’s Autobiogra -
phy. Stein is eerily prescient of the era of global positioning technology 
when she writes, “ Anyway nobody can get lost any more because the 
earth is all so covered with everybody and everybody is always moving 
 “Reading at It”  55
around .”86 Not being able to get lost conveys a loss of mystery as well  
as a loss of the possibility for unique discovery. Stein goes as far as to 
suggest that “the only thing that really bothers me is that the earth now 
is all covered over with people and that hearing anybody is not of any 
particular importance.”87 Surely more than this must have been bother -
ing Stein in 1937, and yet she places a singular emphasis on overpopu -
lation and its supposedly deafening effects. She also seemingly alludes 
to the rise of fascism, communism, and the New Deal when she returns  
to the theme of organization: “The world is completely covered with 
people and these people would like to be completely organized to live.”88
Stein’s ultimate conceptual antagonist is in some sense memory, in-  
sofar as it is an obstacle to the creation of “the continuous present.” This 
also informs her understanding of the role of technology in American 
history: “The T wentieth Century, which America created after the Civil 
W ar, and which had certain elements, had a definite influence on me. 
And in The Making of Americans  . . . I gradually and slowly found out 
that there are two things I had to think about; the fact that knowledge 
is acquired, so to speak, by memory; but that when you know anything, 
memory doesn’t come in. At that moment that you are conscious of 
knowing anything, memory plays no part. Y ou have the sense of the 
immediate.”89 Stein elaborates elsewhere on the industrial organization 
that makes possible a kind of wholesale eradication of historical mem -
ory. For Stein, the American psyche is T aylorist in its conception of 
time: “The assembling of a thing to make a whole thing and each one of 
these whole things is one of a series, but beside that there is the impor -
tant thing and the very American thing that everybody knows who is an 
American just how many seconds minutes or hours it is going to take to 
do a whole thing.”90 Stein’s use of repetition makes the reader extremely 
self-  conscious of the rhythmic nature of language, and runs generally 
counter to the T aylorist notion of a discrete, normative duration for “the 
assembling of a thing.” The constant use of present tense and participial 
forms—  The Making  of Americans — makes it difficult to remember 
one’s place within a linear succession of events, whether or not those 
events are presented as narrative. Steven Meyer notes that “in her neuro -
anatomical investigations Stein was examining several of the structures 
implicated in the innermost mechanisms of close reading, or of  ‘reading 
in slow motion.’”91 It is also possible to suggest that Stein was examin -
ing the innermost mechanisms of distracted reading, or of reading at an 
56 “Reading at It”
accelerated pace. Meyer cites Wittgenstein’s Culture and Value  in sup -
port of his claim: “I really want my copious punctuation marks to slow 
down the speed of reading. Because I should like to be read slowly.”92 
But Stein’s approach is arguably often the inverse—  by minimizing the 
role of commas, for instance, she in effect speeds up reading, particu -
larly when reading on the page as opposed to reading aloud. What is  
at issue is not necessarily the actual speed of reading, but the ability to 
create “a continuous present” in the mind of the reader. The reader who 
reads at a consistent pace may encounter plenty of “interesting” infor -
mation; the reader who is truly excited will be more likely to vary her 
reading speed. As Stein puts it in the penultimate stanza of Stanzas in 
Meditation , “Thank you for hurrying through.”93
Crary argues that in the late nineteenth century, research on atten -
tion almost invariably led to an impasse, wherein the capacity to pay 
attention revealed itself to be primarily context-  dependent rather than 
immutably fixed in the individual psyche: “Scientific psychology never 
was to assemble knowledge that would compel the efficient function-  
ing of an attentive subject, or that would guarantee a full co-  presence of  
the world and an attentive observer. Instead, the more one investigated, 
the more attention was shown to contain within itself the conditions 
for its own undoing—  attentiveness was in fact continuous with states 
of distraction, reverie, dissociation, and trance. Attention finally could 
not coin  cide with a modern dream of autonomy.”94 Stein’s insistence  
on character psychology places in doubt any attempt to construct a nor -
mative, attentive subject. Crary notes that it “was through the new im-  
peratives of attention that the perceiving body was deployed and made 
productive and orderly, whether as a student, worker, or consumer.”95 
Stein’s texts make such a model of the perceiving body difficult, if not 
impossible, to sustain. Even if Stein presents herself as an ideally atten -
tive observer, it is not possible to attend perfectly to her writings—  at 
least not in the manner required by the scientific testing of Stein’s day. 
For Crary, “attention as a process of selection necessarily meant that 
perception was an activity of exclusion, of rendering parts of a percep -
tual field unperceived.”96 What Stein insists on is a radically inclusive 
perceptual field: “anybody at any moment knows everything.”97 This  
is not to say that Stein’s politics are always so inclusive; it is to say  
that Stein continually presents us with a perceptual field that refuses to 
exclude on our behalf as readers. For Stein, the closest approximation of 
 “Reading at It”  57
such an inclusive perceptual field was the cinema, for her the best embodi -
ment of the very American principle of  e pluribus unum : “In The Making 
of Americans , I was doing what the cinema was doing. I was making a 
continuous succession of the statement of what that person was until I 
had not many things but one thing.”98 Through the repetition of words 
and images—  or to use Stein’s term, through “insistence”—  character is 
revealed. It is our character as readers ultimately that will determine 
how we perceive the inclusive perceptual field. The best way to view 
that inclusive field (as well as to view ourselves within that field) might 
be to fall into the inevitable experience of continuous partial distraction.
“Making Americans American”:  
The Liberation of Linguistic Excess
Early in 1944, Stein offered an account of the “decided liberation” that 
led her to her mature style that differs considerably from the accounts 
presented in The Autobiography  and “The Gradual Making.” Expect-  
ing that the liberation from German occupation was imminent, Stein 
describes how the Spanish–  American W ar
was another big step in making Americans American.  . . . W e knew then 
that we did not need Europe to tell us what to do what we wanted to do  . . . 
It was a decided liberation, that was when I began to write, and I found 
myself plunged into a water of words, having words choosing words liber -
ating words feeling words and the words were all ours and it was enough 
that we held them in our hands to play with them whatever you can play 
with is yours, and this was the beginning of knowing all America.99
Earlier in the same piece, Stein presents a narrative of the late nine -
teenth century in which among the most important consequences of 
“the enormous industrial development of the United States from coast 
to coast” was that “there never was a country who read and wrote so 
much, the daily newspapers alone in the United States in one month 
could fill a fairly large sized library what could they do about it how can 
you change a language when it is being read so much so continuously 
any and every day.”100 Stein’s answer to this self-  proposed question is to 
respond that because of the very quantity of language produced in the 
United States, American writers could not in fact “change the language”:
58 “Reading at It”
So what could they do. They could not change the language it was writ-  
ten too much every day and so from the beginning they began to see if by 
putting a sort of hydraulic pressure on the language they could not force  
it to become another language even if all the words were the same, the 
grammatical construction the same, and the idioms the same. So slowly by 
conscious choice of words making some words come closer to each other 
than they ever had been before, in the use of language, making a movement 
of the language that was steadily clearer more monotonous and fresher  
by thinning out the thicknesses, by pressure steady pressure they did not 
change the language but they did succeed they are succeeding in making it 
feel different very very different.101
This extraordinary passage—  though it never made it into print in Stein’s 
lifetime—  deserves to be better known. Stein’s language alternates be-  
tween the mechanistic (“hydraulic pressure”) and the domestic (“thin -
ning out the thicknesses”). “More monotonous and fresher” in this sense 
is a quintessential Steinian paradox—  in much the same way that the 
title T ender Buttons  can convey (almost oxymoronically) an inseparable 
blend of mechanistic, organic, sexual, and emotional meanings.
Approaching Stein’s writings simply as reactions to information over -
load would obscure the very complexity of the “movement of language” 
they insistently seek to represent.102 Information abundance might very 
well threaten “common sense,” but Stein was hardly an unconflicted 
apologist for common sense. Among Stein’s most perceptive contempo -
raries with respect to the increasing pace of the “movement of language” 
was William Carlos Williams, who in his 1930 essay on Stein writes, 
“Movement (for which in a petty way logic is taken), the so-  called 
search for truth and beauty, is for us the effect of a breakdown of the 
attention. But movement must not be confused with what we attach to 
it but, for the rescuing of the intelligence, must always be considered 
aimless without progress.”103 Williams, who himself had extensive scien -
tific training, appreciated Stein’s ability to effect “a breakdown of atten -
tion,” but he did not, in the manner of Skinner, reduce Stein’s writings 
to a caricature of science. Williams saw something far more significant 
in Stein’s writing, and he viewed her writing as epistemologically supe -
rior to the science of the day: “What are philosophers, scientists, reli -
gionists, they that have filled up literature with their pap? Writers, of a 
kind. Stein simply erases their stories, turns them off and does without 
 “Reading at It”  59
them, their logic (founded merely on the limits of the perceptions) 
which is supposed to transcend the words, along with them. Stein 
denies it. The words, in writing, she discloses, transcend everything.”104 
But perhaps the words do not “transcend everything,” but rather every -
thing transcends everything — by which I mean to suggest that, for Stein, 
there is no transcendental knowledge and there is no singular word. As 
Stein wrote to Ellery Sedgwick in 1934, “No [my writing] is not so auto -
matic as [B.  F . Skinner] thinks.  . . . If there is anything secret it is the 
other way.  . . . I think I achieve by xtra consciousness, excess.”105
Referring to the following passage in Everybody’s Autobiography ,  
Steven Meyer suggests that there is a strong relationship between Stein’s 
resistance to organization and her interest in the profusion of “verbal 
flux”: “Pictures have been imprisoned in frames, quite naturally and now 
when people are all all peoples are asking to be imprisoned in organiza -
tion it is quite natural that pictures are trying to escape from the prison 
the prison of framing. For many years I have taken all pictures out of 
their frames, I never keep them in them, and now that I have let them 
out for so many years they want to get out by themselves, it is very inter -
esting.”106 For Meyer, “T ypically  . . . human beings remain only vaguely 
aware of the language-  inflected voices they are continually setting in 
motion, despite passing much of their waking lives in the midst of ver -
bal flux. By contrast  . . . not only did [Stein] seek to recreate the experi -
ence in hundreds of ways and hundreds of compositions, but she also 
found that writing functioned readily as a medium for investigating how 
‘organization’ might be reconceived as something other than a ‘prison of 
framing.’ ”107 The prison house of framing in many ways is more accu -
rate than Nietzsche’s “prison house of language”—  at least as a descrip -
tion of the conditions of representation. The “prison house of language” 
invites linguistic determinism; Stein, in Marjorie Perloff ’s terms, instead 
engages in linguistic indeterminism—  or perhaps we might even say she 
engages in linguistic overdeterminism.108 “Reflection on the Atomic 
Bomb” suggests that information excess might counteract the liberating 
power of linguistic excess that Stein continued to celebrate so forcefully 
a little over a year earlier in “ American Language and Literature.”
“Reflection on the Atomic Bomb” is, however, a bleaker work than it 
first appears. Troublingly, the address of Bernard Faÿ’s country home  
is written on the cover of the manuscript cahier.109 Faÿ had at this point 
been imprisoned for twenty-  three months and had been stripped of his 
60 “Reading at It”
chair at the College de France. Five months later, he would be convicted 
of dégradation nationale  as a Nazi collaborator. At the very least, Stein 
ignored a good deal of the information she had about Faÿ’s activities—  
particularly concerning his role in crushing the Freemasons. There is 
good reason to read the “Reflection” as a document that operates by 
means of what it refuses to say, rather than what it does say. “Reflection” 
makes no mention of the suffering of civilians, nor does it give any sense 
of the scale of the Holocaust. Barbara Will’s Unlikely Collaboration  has 
given us the most detailed portrait to date of Stein’s late work—  
somewhat surprisingly, however, Unlikely Collaboration  makes no men -
tion of “Reflection on the Atomic Bomb.”110 In an earlier essay, Will 
describes “Reflection” in a footnote as “naïve and disingenuous.”111 John 
Whittier-Ferguson, by contrast, reads it as a kind of retraction:
Stein  . . . realizes that, in the wake of the second world war, she has very 
little to say. It is essentially a problem of scale of calibrating words and 
things. If the Great W ar, with its ten million dead, brought us into moder -
nity, what do the fifty million dead in its sequel bring? Why should she 
continue her demanding, risky search for an appropriate register in which 
to write about this new form of modernity? The history of her own art 
ends not with Hitler after all, but with Harry Truman and the invention 
he authorizes for use. Her last reflection on art is almost as simple as say -
ing nothing.112
In Whittier-  Ferguson’s account, by saying little, Stein is in effect speak -
ing volumes. While that may in part be the case, we might also recall that 
Stein’s tone is confident, and “Reflection” doesn’t seem to indicate that 
Stein felt her search for an appropriate register had failed. Unlike the 
immediate postwar writing of Beckett, Blanchot, and Celan, Stein’s post -
war writing does not cultivate tropes of silence. Stein eagerly returned 
to a life in the public eye at war’s end. With the exception of the occupa -
tion years, Stein’s later life was lived entirely in the media spotlight, and 
she was a prodigious producer and consumer of information.
Setting aside for a moment the complexities of Stein’s personal expe -
rience of the war, I want to suggest that “Reflection” may reveal another 
set of contradictions. How does getting too much information make  
us unnatural or irrational? W ould Stein’s writing itself qualify as infor -
mation? Stein seems to blame everyone getting too much information 
 “Reading at It”  61
for instilling an irrational fear of the bomb. But does too much informa -
tion also lead to the creation of the bomb? “Reflection” implies that the 
masses of information we get all day long (presumably primarily through 
newspapers and radio) are as dangerous as the weapons that ended the 
war. While this may be simple hyperbole, it is also an epistemological or 
even an ideological claim. T oo much information clouds our common 
sense: could this be what happened to those in thrall to Fascist propa -
ganda (perhaps even including Stein herself )? But what does Stein mean 
by common sense in this context? So much of Stein’s writing seems to 
celebrate the conditions produced by “too much information”—  distrac -
tion, uncertainty, polysemy—  and yet “Reflection” seems to suggest that 
the inability to process large quantities of information leads to irratio -
nal fear. Stacy Lavin writes of “Reflection” that “the vagueness of Stein’s 
reference to information  (information about what? Where does “every -
body” get it?) throws into relief the sense of sheer quantity  conveyed by 
the sentence.”113 Lavin, it seems to me, is exactly right to suggest that the 
very vagueness of Stein’s declaration in part accounts for its rhetorical 
power. Stein is of course thinking more of radio and newspapers than 
she is about emergent information technologies such as the computer 
or microfilm. Stein’s 1945 W ars I Have Seen , for instance, could just as 
easily be titled Wars I Have Heard  since much of the book describes the 
experience of listening to the radio under occupation. For Stein, per -
haps the crucial difference between the first and second world wars is 
the increasing role of the mass media. In Mrs. Reynolds , for instance, she 
describes how “suddenly in September 1940 the United States of Amer -
ica instead of being a part of a big land illimitably flat, the land against 
which Christopher Columbus bumped himself in 1492 became a part of 
the round world that goes around and around.”114 In “Reflection,” at 
least, “information” is not medium-  specific. W e might even read “Reflec -
tion” as embodying a postwar zeitgeist where, in Mark Goble’s words, 
“history becomes a problem not of loss but excess and even abundance,” 
with the result that “the material status of the mediums that bear [his -
tory]” becomes “impossible to manage.”115
Despite its vagueness, I do not think “Reflection” is a naïve text. For 
Barbara Wineapple, it is “interesting not only for what it says but what 
it represents: the occlusion of Gertrude Stein and other women—  men 
too, primarily modernists—  as political beings who respond to elec -
tions, wars, economics, law, jurisprudence, and those nefarious gadgets 
62 “Reading at It”
we, these days, have christened weapons of mass destruction.”116 For 
Wineapple, this occlusion is largely self-  chosen by Stein, and thus the 
“Reflection” is a conscious statement of political disengagement. T o this 
I would add that Stein achieves this distance from history and everyday 
politics, in part, by means of her nebulous invocation of information. 
“Reflection” can be read as employing a “blame the media” strategy—  
but it can also be read as a calculated, albeit brief, appraisal of some  
of the most important developments of the postwar era: the transition 
to a post-  Fordist economy increasingly dominated by advertising and 
information; the emergence of a cold war culture of secrecy; the anxiety 
induced by the overwhelming vulnerability of civilians to violence. By 
the very nature of its emphatic disavowal of the bomb’s power, “Reflec -
tion” invites readers to be perplexed and discomfited.
Marshall McLuhan famously described the bomb as “pure informa -
tion,” the ultimate marker of the transition from the “mechanical age” to 
the “electronic age.”117 In the same 1964 talk, McLuhan used the term 
“information overload” for the first time in his writing. In describing  
the bomb as “pure information,” McLuhan meant that it marked the 
triumph of “big science,” the nation-  state and the research university. 
But in another sense, the bomb is a kind of summation of information 
that negates the collective pursuit of progressive knowledge. It is impos -
sible even to “read at” the effects of the bomb. Stein’s last words spoken 
to T oklas—  “What is the question?”—  are justifiably famous; but the 
parting words of Stein’s last written composition may be just as signifi -
cant for what they have to say about the historical changes Stein wit -
nessed over the course of her lifetime: “This is a nice story.”118 But it is 
also not a nice story. It is too many stories at once. As she writes in Wars  
I Have Seen , “There are so many stories so many stories and so much 
confusion.”119
632
BOB BROWN, “INFORG”
THE “READIES” AT THE LIMITS OF 
MODERNIST COSMOPOLITANISM
As soon as my reading machine becomes a daily necessity certainly it  
will be out of date. Pocket reading machines will be the vogue then, 
reading matter will radioed as it is today to newsies on shipboard and 
words perhaps eventually will be recorded directly on the palpitating ether.
Reading from books is an anachronism in this Airplane Age.  . . . The 
readies are the only suitable form of airplane reading, they are in time 
with the age.
— Bob Brown, Readies for Bob Brown’s Machine
I  was almost a book myself,” the American writer Bob Brown (1886–  
   1959) recalls characteristically of his younger self.1 “Books are I are 
one,” reads the colophon to his 1450–  1950— as if he had finally achieved 
the metamorphosis by embodying the entire history of printed books 
since the time of Gutenberg. Brown’s 1930–  31 reading machine, I argue, 
hyperbolically attempts to eradicate the difference between human and 
book, as well as between local reading and global reading. Brown could 
thus be described somewhat anachronistically as an example of what 
Luciano Floridi refers to as an “inforg.” Floridi suggests that in the infor -
mation age, “we are not standalone entities, but rather interconnected 
organisms, or inforgs, sharing with biological agents and engineered 
artifacts a global environment ultimately made of information, the info -
sphere.”2 Brown’s reading machine, I suggest most provocatively, fashions 
readers and writers as global word processors avant le lettre , or rather post 
le lettre . The reading machine implies that electronically transmitted lan -
guage will alter the nature of literary form; at the same time, it parodies “
64 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
the Americanization of the wor(l)d brought about by new technologies 
of communication. Kenneth Goldsmith has recently declared “I am a 
word processor.”3 Alan Liu similarly describes how he “went to sleep 
one day a cultural critic and woke the next metamorphosed into a data 
processor.”4 Brown anticipates such claims. Moreover, as an inveterate 
traveler and expatriate, he projects such claims onto a backdrop of 
increasing global interconnectedness.
Brown remained largely forgotten by scholars of modernism until 
Jerome McGann declared of Readies for Bob Brown’s Machine  in 1993, 
“When the afterhistory of modernism is written, this collection  . . . will 
be recognized as a work of signal importance.”5 Published in France in 
1931, The Readies  anthology included texts by Gertrude Stein, William 
Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, F .  T. Marinetti, Kay Boyle, and Eugene 
Jolas. Since McGann made this claim, increased critical attention has 
been paid to Brown—  by Michael North, Craig Dworkin, and Craig 
Saper, among others—  and the recent republication of The Readies  
(although, alas, not the full anthology) and Word s  by Rice University 
Press should generate additional scholarly interest. Little attention has 
been paid, however, to Brown’s other writings or to his life—  much of 
which he spent in Brazil.6 I argue that Brown’s reading machine should 
be considered in the context of modernist cosmopolitanism, and that 
behind Brown’s machine lurks an ambivalent response to the global 
spread of American financial and technological supremacy. Michael 
North notes, “The very extremity of Brown’s claims and the eccentricity 
of his machine are valuable in exposing certain inevitable blind spots  
in the machine vision of transatlantic modernism.”7 Despite its cos -
mopolitan aims, Brown’s “Optical Writing” remains indicative of white 
American expatriate narratives, and its persistent use of dialect is at odds 
with Brown’s aspirations to create a universal optical language. In this 
vein, North has shown how Brown’s Readies  texts are based on racial -
ized notions of American culture and language.8 This chapter builds  
on that account by arguing that Brown’s “readies” are significant not  
only for what they have to say about the racialization of language, but 
also for what they have to say about the limits of modernist cosmopoli -
tanism. Many of Brown’s contemporaries recognized him as a funda -
mentally parodic writer (indeed, few of them took him seriously).9 But 
recent critics have tended to read him much more literally—  and in 
doing so, they have tended to overlook the cosmopolitan dimensions of 
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  65
his writing.10 Brown may remain a “minor” modernist, but he is a reveal -
ing figure for the “afterhistory of modernism” now being written—  an 
afterhistory that has focused increased scrutiny on the hyperbolic uni -
versalizing claims of high modernism (many of which were subject to 
scrutiny and ridicule even as they were being formulated). It may be 
that an important facet of “bad modernism” is the work of noncanonical 
modernists, whose writing—  if indeed it is of a second-  rate, imitative, 
“hanger-  on” nature—  can reveal as much about modernism’s interna -
tionalist aspirations as that of canonical writers like Joyce and W oolf.11 
In writing what he calls a “minor history” of T ony Conrad, the art histo -
rian Brandon Joseph suggests that “to designate and examine Conrad  
as ‘minor’  . . . is to acknowledge the manner in which he problematizes 
the terms ‘musician,’ ‘composer,’ ‘artist,’ ‘filmmaker,’ and so on.”12 Brown, 
like Conrad, worked in many genres (and even in many professions), 
but his writing—  even if we acknowledge its “minority”—  “does not lack 
all relation to major categories, historical transformations, movements, 
or individuals.”13 On the contrary, Brown’s writing (and The Readies  
anthology in particular) may bear a closer relation to the major catego -
ries and historical currents of transatlantic modernism than the writing 
of his better-  known friends and peers.
Sitting on Top of the World-  as- Oyster
Brown’s first published optical poem (see Figure 6) appeared in 1917 in 
an auspicious location, the second issue of The Blind Man  (edited by 
Marcel Duchamp, Beatrice W ood, and Henri-  Pierre Roché) on the page 
immediately preceding Alfred Stieglitz’s famous photo of Duchamp’s 
Fountain  (the urinal he signed as R. Mutt). Brown’s optical writing thus 
emerges at a key moment of self-  definition for what is arguably the first 
American avant-  garde, New Y ork Dada, described by Marjorie Perloff 
as both “a European invention and intervention.”14 The son of a Chicago 
rare-  book dealer, Brown was a dedicated traveler, a prolific writer, and 
an avid book collector. Brown wrote roughly thirty books, at least five  
of which—  Gems: A Censored Anthology , Word s , Demonics , 1450–  1950, 
and The Readies — were closely allied with transition ’s “Revolution of  
the W ord.” He was published in some of modernism’s most influential 
journals: Others , The Blind Man , and transition ; he was close enough to 
Gertrude Stein to have merited a portrait from her in 1928; he assisted 
66 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
in editing Nancy Cunard’s Negro  anthology in the early 1930s; for his 
Readies  anthology he was able to assemble many of high modernism’s 
most prominent writers; in the 1950s the Brazilian concrete poet Augusto 
de Campos produced a version of Brown’s 1450–  1950 for a Brazilian 
audience (without knowing that Brown spoke Portuguese and had lived 
for many years in Brazil).15
Critics have tended to dismiss outright Brown’s post-  Readies  projects, 
which mostly center on culinary and travel writing.16 There is, how-  
ever, a continuity between Brown’s later “nonliterary” projects—  such  
as Let There Be Beer!  (an anti-  prohibition global history of beer) and 
The Complete Book of Cheese  (a global primer on cheese)—  and his  
earlier poetic writing. From the teens to the 1950s, Brown mounted a 
critique of American culture from something of a global Epicurean per -
spective. He spent a significant portion of his life outside the United 
States—  living in Brazil from 1919 to 1928 and France from 1930 to 1934 
and again returning to Brazil for most of the 1940s—  and his writing 
often comments on the global influence of American culture. While in 
Brazil, Brown edited a weekly newspaper titled the Brazilian American ; 
he founded corresponding journals, The Mexican American  (in Mexico 
City) and The British American  (in London). By his own account, Brown 
was a prolific reader, writer, eater, and drinker—  reveling in a kind of 
aesthetic and sensual omnivorism.
The visual and aural punning of “Eyes on the Half-  Shell” would cul -
minate in Brown’s 1450–  1950, published by Harry Crosby’s Black Sun 
Press in 1929, the year before Brown proposed the reading machine.  
In the self-  portrait (Figure 7) with which Brown concluded 1450–  1950, 
he again recycled the “Eyes on the Half-  Shell” motif (as he would  
also in the Readies  anthology). In the self-  portrait he places the optical 
poem at the center of the globe with himself as a stick figure on top.  
As crude and frivolous as the drawing may seem, it is nonetheless in-  
dicative of Brown’s attempt to portray himself as both a writer and as  
a living embodiment of the history and afterhistory of books. In this 
self- portrait (which to the best of my knowledge has never received 
scholarly treatment), Brown figures himself as a writing machine and  
a reading machine. Nearly every aspect of the drawing is doubled—  
through its head, the figure takes in images and sounds; through its 
“PaINfully PleaSaNt Place ,” the figure presumably defecates (or gen -
erates) newly digested sounds and images. At the upper right corner we 
Figure 6.  Bob Brown, in The Blind Man , no. 2, p. 3, 1917.

68 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
see “Book S” and correspondingly at the lower left corner “ My read INg 
Mach INe,” and apposite to these, “ 1450 ” and “ 1950 .” At the center of 
Brown’s body is his “ StoMach for everyth INg.” On one side of his 
chest is his “ art” and on the other his “ro Se rIB” (Rose being the name 
of his wife). One of Brown’s feet rests on China, the other on Brazil. If 
Brown is a world conqueror, he is decidedly self-  deprecatory (or self-  
defecatory) about his accomplishment.
Brown’s optical poems appear less haphazard when one recalls the 
original proximity of “Eyes on the Half-  Shell” to Duchamp’s “Case of  
R. Mutt,” arguably modernism’s most dramatic challenge to traditional 
aesthetics, as well as to prevailing notions of artistic agency. The Blind 
Man  was deliberately an exercise in bathroom humor; Brown’s optical 
poems are correspondingly crude in content and in execution. The most 
humorous aspect of Brown’s self-  portrait may be his substitution of the 
entire globe with “Eyes on the Half-  Shell.” Brown is literally sitting on 
his own refuse—  a slippage between text and image, past and present. 
The picture seems to suggest that you are not only what you eat, but 
also what you read and see. Like Duchamp’s “Boîte-  en- V alise” (which 
would recycle Duchamp’s oeuvre in portable form, and the first of which 
wasn’t completed until 1940), Brown’s portrait is a microcosmic adver -
tisement for the artist and his art. The self-  portrait is an unapologetic 
repackaging of Brown’s earlier work. The central bifurcation of the sketch 
would seem to be between a material past of books-  as- objects and an 
immaterial future in which optical writing transcends nation, tradition, 
and speech. Next to the opposed “1450” and “1950” are what Brown else -
where refers to as “ fly SPeckS / oN yellowed PageS,” which take on 
the shape of hearts or chili peppers. The fly specks are the self-  conscious 
mark of the minor writer, or of the book collector. At the heart of 
Brown’s writing is a defense of the unremunerated love of the amateur. 
The fly, one might infer, is also “the flitting Money Fly,” the term Brown 
uses for money changers (without anti-  Semitic overtones) in his poem 
“ American Eagle Broadcast” (discussed below).17 The fly cannot remain 
simply a fly, but must be metamorphosed through visual and textual 
punning. Otherwise the fly would be an image of death; thus, “there are 
no flies on me” in the final version of the self-  portrait both embraces 
and defies Brown’s obscurity. Like so many of Brown’s visual puns, the 
fly speck is absurdly literal—  which is to say that it disguises its com -
plexity from all but the most diligent reader–  viewers.
Figure 7.  Bob Brown, “Self-  Portrait” (1929) in 1450–  1950, n.p. [“ I doN’t dIe! / 
No fl IeS oN Me!” and “ the Se PoMeS Shall / r ISe aga IN” added by Brown 
in 1950.] Courtesy of Phoebe Brown.

70 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
If it is difficult to take Brown’s projections and puns altogether seri -
ously, herein I would suggest there is a critical opportunity rather than a 
critical impasse—  in that Brown’s parodic interventions can be fascinat -
ingly polyvalent. Brown traffics in the racialized discourses char  acteristic 
of white high modernism, but he is also consistently hostile to Ameri -
can capitalism, as well as to the spread of American cultural dominance. 
Brown’s metaphors and substitutions continually shift, resulting in a 
literalization of himself as both a product and producer of texts and 
images within a globalized marketplace. In 1450–  1950 (see Figure 8), we 
read “ the world IS My oy Ster,” but underneath this are “ MouN-
taIN oySter,” “PraIrIe oy Ster,” and “ oySter of the Sea.”18 What 
all these oysters have in common—  the world, the testicle, the hangover 
cure drink, and lastly the “literal” oyster—  is that they are seen through 
American oyster eyes, awestruck and naïve in their ambitious attempt 
to consume the foreign.
Bob Brown Graphomaniac/Bob Brown Bibliomaniac
Brown frequently refers self-  deprecatingly to his prolific verbal output, 
but he does not similarly regret his copious consumption of words. “Our 
potential consumption of words through all the senses is terrific,” he 
writes. “W ords gush through our minds at a great rate and we hesitate, 
slow them down to stutter or stammer them out.”19 Brown describes 
two key points of origin for the reading machine—  both of which the -
matize his saturation as a writer and as a reader. In the first account, 
Brown links it to his experiences as book collector: “The machine came 
directly out of my pioneering in the ideas business, writing millions of 
words, foreseeing the possibilities of the movies and living exclusively 
with words and books. Since I was sixteen I had bought and sold rare 
books and handled with growing interest every kind of published mate -
rial from papyrus through incunabula to the most recent products of 
private presses. I attended books auctions in Chicago, New Y ork and 
London as religiously as some people go to church.”20 Brown argues from 
an entirely plausible utilitarian perspective that the reading machine 
will save time, paper, transport costs, and so forth—  but he also argues 
that the machine will rehabilitate reading and give new life to literature. 
The reading machine, in a sense, has the power to make it possible for 
all readers to partake of the collector’s mania for words.
Figure 8.  “The W orld Is My Oyster,” from 1450–  1950, n.p. Courtesy of Phoebe 
Brown.

72 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
In the second account of the machine’s origin, Brown recounts how in 
1914 he “read Gertrude Stein and tape-  tickers in W all Street.”21 McGann’s 
groundbreaking reading of Brown makes much of Brown’s interest in 
Stephen Crane, but does not mention his interest in the ticker tape, 
which figures more prominently in Brown’s account of the genesis of 
the machine: “The W all Street ticker is a reading machine. I didn’t know 
it then, but you know it already. W e read the tape. It passed before our 
eyes jerkily, but in a continuous line. Endlessly, at any speed, jerk, jerk, 
jerk, when the Market’s pulse was fast, click, click, when it was slow.”22 
The reading machine, like the ticker, is in effect a perpetual motion 
machine of language: “My mind ticked words, I wanted to help it tick 
them on for eternity.”23 The aspiration here is much like that described 
in N. Katherine Hayles’s account of the posthuman subject: “If we can 
become the information we have constructed, we can achieve effective 
immortality.”24
Brown continually describes himself as overwhelmed by data, but he 
also describes himself as invigorated by that same excess. The reading 
machine somewhat implausibly provides an antidote by giving the reader 
more control over the speed of reading. The ability to vary the tempo of 
reading constitutes the single greatest attribute of the reading machine:
Why wasn’t there a man-  made machine like the running tape-  of- thought 
device in the mind which would carry words endlessly to all reading eyes in 
one unbroken line, a reading machine as rapid and refreshing as thought, 
to take the place of the antiquated word-  dribbling book? I wanted a read -
ing machine to bring the words of others faster into my mind. I wanted a 
reading machine to carry my words faster and farther into the minds of 
others. I conceived that with such a machine to represent them fully, writ -
ers might find a new urge to write more vividly, or at least differently, to 
approach closer to the hieroglyphic mysteries that have streamed across 
their gossamer braintapes from the beginning of time to infinity. Such a 
machine would provide an outlet for things of my own. With it maybe I 
wouldn’t have to write any more crap, with it perhaps I wouldn’t have to 
read any more crap.25
By drawing on the dream of optical writing, Brown provides himself a 
platform for his own writing, as well as a way in which to eliminate the 
traditional restrictions of printed media. Optical writing is universally 
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  73
legible (at least to the initiated) and full of endless potential energy—  
like the ticker tape, like Esperanto, like C. K. Ogden’s Basic English, and 
like the almighty dollar (all of which thrived in the 1920s).
Optical writing is also a response to what could be called the T aylori -
zation of the word. Brown’s extraordinary run-  on paragraphs should be 
quoted in full to give a sense of their odd mix of exhaustion and energy. 
Brown recounts his early years as a writer in which he labors endlessly 
in literary assembly lines, calling himself “a factory of fiction.” Such mass 
production of the word eliminates any true authorship, and leaves be-  
hind only the husks of hackneyed genres:
At twenty-  nine I had written and sold 1,000 short and long fiction stories, 
one every 3 and 6/10ths days, counting 100,000 word typewriter busters 
and 3,000 word playful finger-  tip type-  ticklers. I had written a best seller, 
and a successful book of detective stories “The Remarkable Adventures of 
Christopher Poe,” jingles, sketches, monologues, serials, digests, slogans, 
advertisements, feuilliton, reports, memoirs, confessions, tales, narratives, 
guides, monographs, descriptions, obituaries, wise-  cracks, legends, jour -
nals, lives, plays, adventures, experiences, romances, fairy tales, parables, 
apologues, circulars, doggerel, sonnets, odes, episodes, lyrics, thrillers, 
dime novels, nickel novels, society verse, essays, rondelets, biographies and 
codexes. My stories were published sometimes as many as five or six in  
a single issue of a pulp magazine, under my own name Robert Carlton 
Brown and under a dozen nom-  de- plumes.26
Brown translates his grueling experience of speed writing immediately 
onto his experience of reading. All genres have united in his mastery of 
their kitsch versions. T ender Buttons  is precisely so revolutionary for 
him because it teaches him how to read all over again. T o “read in a man -
ner as up-  to- date as the lively talkies,” one has to find a way to revolu -
tionize reading as well as writing. Rather than allowing technology to 
desensitize the reader, Brown had to find a way to make technology 
resensitize the reader. Brown can hardly be taken entirely at his word 
on the first page of his original  transition  article when he proposes “a 
simple reading machine which I can carry or move around and attach to 
any old electric light plug and read hundred thousand word novels in ten 
minutes if I want to, and I want to.”27 Brown’s ideal of reading sounds 
much like Marinetti’s ideal of cuisine in the 1932 Futurist Cookbook . To  
74 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
reduce the meal to a pill or the novel to ten-  minute experience of infor -
mation retrieval is to mount a challenge to tradition that alters our 
notions of the entire experience of either reading or eating. If these pills 
are hard to swallow, they should be taken with a grain of salt—  the death 
of the page-  turner, it turns out, can only be facilitated by the death of 
the page.
The reading machine is an antidote to the fatigue of writer and reader, 
both of whom can only fight overstimulation with more overstimula -
tion. The white-  collar worker is too tired to read a conventional book; 
he falls asleep with it in bed:
Now shift this tiresome book in your hand, prop up your eyelids with 
match sticks and move your eyes wearily back and forth over another three 
thousand lines or so. When you have a reading machine to bring the type 
right up before your eyes you won’t need to prop them open, or search for 
words from one side of the page to the other; words will be brought right 
up flush with your vision and the reading intake of your mind.
At the time I had written myself out I read Gertrude Stein’s T ender But -
tons. I didn’t know what it was about then any more than I know what’s 
about anything she’s writing today, but I can still read it when I haven’t 
anything more stimulating, and get a kick out of it. At the time T ender But -
tons was published I had to read it because positively there was nothing 
else in America to read.28
Rather than prop our eyes open with match sticks, we can prop them 
open with reading material that is more interesting in its mode of deliv -
ery as well as in its content. Brown implicates his reader in a sort of 
Clockwork Orange  scene wherein the tired reader must continually fight 
sleepiness and distraction through artificial means. Stein breaks the cycle 
of redundancy by drawing attention to repetition. Like the character 
Data (who reads at superhuman speed) on Star Trek: The Next Genera -
tion, Brown’s idealized reader becomes one with information. It is impos -
sible for a human to keep up, “to continue reading at today’s speed.”  
The solution to the problem can only be to go beyond the technology  
of reading, to get rid of “useless words,” to get rid of useless languages, to 
view words as vectors and images rather than as mundane combina -
tions of letters.29 Commas and periods only slow readers down, whereas 
arrows, equals signs, and hyphens—  like flashing cursors—  accelerate the 
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  75
transformation of symbols into thought. The dream of the reading 
machine is cybernetic (to cite a coinage made only seventeen years after 
the reading machine was proposed): the reading machine counters the 
entropic decay of local languages by means of something like a Max -
well’s demon of reading, a demon who implants ideas directly in the 
brain of the globalized reader. The field of vision is limitless, the second 
law of thermodynamics is nullified—  the reading machine, like the stock 
market, is premised on infinite expansion, barring some unforeseen 
apocalyptic event. Through optical writing human beings would have a 
surer basis for communication, and there would be no need for transla -
tion—  or so Brown’s hyperbolic boosterism might lead us to believe.
As the 1930s wore on, Brown increasingly sympathized with the inter -
nationalist aspirations of the Popular Front. Brown wrote for both The 
Masses  and The New Masses , and in 1940 published Can We Co-  Operate?  
which ends with a somewhat belated paean to Soviet communism (he 
had visited the Soviet Union twice, in 1936 and 1937). By 1935 Brown is 
extolling Theodore Dreiser and Mike Gold at the expense of Pound 
and Stein, whom he labels as “dying bourgeois writers.”30 In discuss-  
ing an upcoming writers’ congress, he notes, “ Americans of all political 
colors will convene to organize a single body to fight against fascism in 
defense of culture. And here the liquidation of the Ezra Pounds and Ger -
trude Steins will be duly celebrated.”31 Brown’s use of “liquidation” in this 
context is chillingly cavalier—  but once again he is likely exaggerating for 
effect. The juxtaposition of the plural Pounds and Steins is intriguing 
(particularly since Brown knew both personally). At least in this context, 
Brown’s communist allegiances seem to have led him to group Pounds 
and Steins together as writers whose work could be considered retro -
grade only in terms of its political content. As Stein and Pound drifted 
rightward in the 1930s, Brown drifted left—  no longer as confident in the 
technophilic modernism he had championed only a few years earlier.
One primary effect of American technological dominance in the 
twentieth century—  and an effect particularly strongly felt whenever 
the word is technologized—  is the spread of global English.32 Manuel 
Komroff notes in his contribution to The Readies , “Supposing you have 
made a new fiddle, and supposing we admit it is as good as a classical 
Stradivarius. But the tune you play is after all only Y ankee Doodle!”33 In 
referring to this most trite and jingoistic of American songs, Komroff is 
perhaps inadvertently pointing out that while the reading machine may 
76 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
revolutionize the form taken by the word, it may not revolutionize the 
content. The language of the readies has yet to be invented—  the danger 
is that the language of the readies will be a financialized American lan -
guage, without new words and forms suited to the new world produced 
by the spread of faster communications technologies. Brown proposes 
a kind of myth of origin where mother tongues inevitably come under 
the purview of Holy Rollers (Pentecostals) who resemble the high roll -
ers of American finance:
Bawling creative Babes in the W ord continue the struggle to shatter the 
filmy caul they were born with and get at the rosy nourishing nipples of 
their mother, the Sphinx-  like Reader. Manifestos have been broadcast in 
all tongues in all times, dating from the one God issued at the T ower of 
Babble, which carries on today in the Unknown T ongue by which the Holy 
Rollers commune. Maybe when we lift our creative writing heads too high 
again through the unexpected outlet of the Reading Machine God will 
come along and pie the type and we’ll have to begin all over again.34
Not only will the reading machine allow readers to overcome their 
mother tongue, the reading machine will allow readers to overcome all 
tongues. If we take Brown at his word, the ambitions of the reading 
machine—  like the ambitions of technocratic American capitalism—  
are limitless. The “Reading Machine God” is a striking incarnation of 
what the historian of technology David Nye calls a “second creation” 
narrative—  a particularly American mythology of reversing the fall of 
man through technological means.
The Cosmoparodic; or, The Ambivalence of  
Cosmopolitan Style
Italo Calvino’s 1965 Cosmicomics  opens with a fable of the earth having 
once been so close to the moon that people were able to jump back  
and forth. An absurd premise surely—  but also an intriguing reversal  
of the typical world-  is- getting-  smaller account of globalization’s ever-  
accelerating pace. Calvino’s fable is in some sense one of prelapsarian 
innocence—  but it could also be read as demonstrating considerable 
skepticism toward the idea that the contraction of space and time is 
anything new. My neologism “cosmoparodics” is intended to describe  
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  77
a similarly fanciful, parodic ambivalence toward cosmopolitanism in 
Brown’s writings.
In her Cosmopolitan Style: Modernism Beyond the Nation , Rebecca 
W alkowitz argues that “the tricks, the ruses, and the insistent pleasures 
of ‘living’ are the necessary conditions of a truly critical cosmopolitan -
ism.”35 The description is apt in describing Brown’s travel-  suffused 
poetry, which retools the clichés of the tourist in the service of a con -
flicted internationalism. It may be that parody, through its insistent rep -
etitions, is particularly well suited to undermine notions of authenticity 
and cultural specificity—  and yet at the same time parody risks reduc -
tively mimicking that which it parodies. Simon Dentith defines parody 
as “any cultural practice which provides a relatively polemical allusive imi -
tation of another cultural production or practice.”36 “Relatively polemi -
cal” gets at the kinds of ambiguities involved in parodic (not to mention 
self- parodic) literary works. T o the extent that Brown is polemical, 
many of his aims would seem to align with those W alkowitz associates 
with “critical cosmopolitanism”:
By speaking of a critical cosmopolitanism, I mean to designate a type of 
international engagement that can be distinguished from “planetary human -
ism” by two principle characteristics: an aversion to heroic tones of appro -
priation and progress, and a suspicion of epistemological privilege, views 
from above or from the center that assume a consistent distinction between 
who is seeing and what is seen. When added to an ideal or method in  
cultural theory, the adjective “critical”—  as in “critical cosmopolitanism,” 
“critical heroism,” “critical internationalism,” and “critical globalization,” to 
name just a few recent examples—  tends to imply double consciousness, 
comparison, negation, and persistent self-  reflection: an “unwillingness to 
rest,” the attempt to operate “in the world  . . . [while] preserving a posture 
of resistance,” the entanglement of “domestic and international perspec -
tives,” and the “self-  reflexive repositioning of the self in the global sphere.”37
Brown’s writings (both before and after his communist turn) are cer -
tainly skeptical of planetary humanism, of heroic authorship, and of the 
tourist’s epistemological privilege (or lack thereof ). But it would be going 
too far to call Brown a critical cosmopolitan—  to call him an ambivalent 
cosmopolitan suggests that his cosmopolitanism is fraught with paradox 
and contradiction. Brown’s ambivalent cosmopolitanism reveals that 
78 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
among the lesser-  known figures of expatriate modernism there was 
both deep skepticism of American capitalism and considerable self-  
awareness about being an American abroad. At the same time, Brown 
could embrace a Metropolis - like vision of something along the lines of a 
global “megapolitan” sublime made possible by relentless technological 
acceleration.
The title poem of Globe-  Gliding , for instance, presents a futurist-  type 
account of an endless global city; the poem is also suffused with a par -
ody of the Deweyan formula of “locality is the only universal”:38
Our Globe is but a
twinkling constellation of cities
Our Great City of Cities
perhaps not as big or important as
Hoboken
in celestial trans-  Neptunian circles
but to us who know no other
our own little world is a great
international metropolis39
Brown might at first seem to be championing what Paul Virilio calls the 
“ominipolis,” an all-  encompassing global metropolis.40 But as is so often 
the case with Brown, his futuristic projections can be read as comic 
displacements on the part of a deracinated subject. In shifting from 
“globe-  trotting” to “globe-  gliding,” Brown introduces a reconfigured 
global proximity brought about by air travel. The cover of Nomadness  
(Figure 9) gives a sense of the cosmopolitan kitsch aesthetic that Brown 
seems to have sought. Airplane, train, and ocean liner vie for position 
with pyramids, mosques, and an Eiffel T ower. T o complement these are 
wine and champagne glasses emblematic of the bohemian expatriate. 
Globe-  Gliding  is hardly innovative in its free-  verse form; its poems are 
“talky” as opposed to optical. The majority of poems in Globe-  Gliding  
are titled after places; the book is in fact the record of a lifetime of travel.
An unpublished and undated poem, “Salute to All the Bob Browns,” 
demonstrates well Brown’s self-  deprecatory style. In its collapsing of 
names, the poem makes an implicitly Steinian case about the interchange -
ability of identities. The poem verges on the kind of “planetary human -
ism” that W alkowitz would differentiate from “critical cosmopolitanism”:
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  79
I know 7 of the 700 Bob Browns
Or is it 7,000, 700,000
I hope 70,000,000
And of these I know
3 are writers (1 black, 1 white, 1 red)
Marx bless the whole
7- come-  11 rainbow of Bob Browns
2 are artists (1 paints in St. Paul,
the other draws in Greenwich Village)
2 big businessmen (a radio announcer in Chi.
and a mortician in Okla)
That’s all the Bob Browns I know personally
And allowing for dainty differences
In shape of ears, color of eyes and epidermis
W e’re all exactly alike41
The Popular Front humanism of the poem is immediately apparent; 
the poem also interestingly deracinates Brown, both in the sense of the -
matizing his anonymity as a minor writer and in terms of making his 
name transcend place and race. Even so, all of these Bob Browns remain 
distinctly American.
Like many of Brown’s post-  1920s writings, Let There Be Beer!  (1932) is 
a global cultural survey that offers a targeted critique of American excep -
tionalism. The argument of Let There Be Beer!  is simple: “Let America 
know that she has traded her birthright for a pot of near-  beer.”42 In 
order to make this argument, Brown takes readers with him on a world 
tour of beers. He is particularly fixated on the disappearance of the 
American free lunch with prohibition: “Mention the old U.S.A. to a 
traveled German, Britisher, Frenchman, or even to a Singapore coolie, 
and he will come right back at you with some wise-  crack about free 
lunch.”43 The free lunch is the ultimate dream of the unapologetic bohe -
mian, for it prioritizes the cost of drink over the cost of food and pro -
vides a universal standard for hospitality: “ All over the world, eyes pop 
and mouths water at the memory of Uncle Sam’s free lunch counter.  
T o allow such a revered institution to fall into decay is an international 
disaster of effect more far-  reaching than England’s going off the gold 
standard—  a crime as unspeakable as the speak-  easy itself.  . . . Free 
lunch is America’s one outstanding achievement.  . . . Nothing on earth 
Figure 9.  Cover, Bob Brown, Nomadness  [English edition title, Globe-  Gliding ] 
(1931). Courtesy of Phoebe Brown.

 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  81
makes such a universal appeal a s something for nothing, anything for 
nothing.”44 It is one thing to go off the gold standard, but entirely another 
thing to go off the free lunch standard. If Horace’s famous poetic dic -
tum in the Ars Poetica  had been aut prodesse aut delectare , to delight and 
instruct, Brown’s poetic dictum is simply “Prosit! and more power to 
you,” “prosit” being the German toast deriving from the Latin prosit , may 
it benefit, the third-  person singular subjunctive of prodesse . The delect -
are, one may presume, goes without saying. Or at least the delectare  part 
need not be apologized for—  especially during the only free interval 
during the day left to the worker.
Brown’s Gems: A Censored Anthology  again critiques American prud -
ery, by taking poems from Palgrave’s Golden Treasury  and suggestively 
blocking out portions. Brown foregrounds the figure of the philistine 
American abroad: “ All forbidden books are sold in shops adjoining 
American Banks and Express Offices the world over.  . . . ‘Ulysses’ they 
know as the modern American Bible, a sort of Science and Health for 
tourists in horn-  rimmed specs who eagerly plank down ten gold dollars 
in payment; they don’t know that ninety-  five percent of the buyers of 
Joyce’s classic read only the last forty pages at a cost of about twenty-  five 
cents a page, but that would surprise them, Americans are notoriously 
crazy and lavish with their money.”45 The suppression of vice would 
seem to succeed only in drawing more attention to it. Ever the book 
dealer, Brown quantifies the amount spent on books by the American 
abroad in terms of the cost per page. The literary value of Ulysses  for  
the American abroad is completely subsumed by its pornographic lure. 
“Book-  legging,” like “boot-  legging,” Brown makes clear, is a profitable 
trade premised on American isolationism.
If many of Brown’s books (especially Globe-  Gliding , Let There Be Beer!  
and Gems ) attempt speedy round-  the- world tours in terms of their con -
tent, The Readies  anthology attempts a speeded-  up round-  the- world 
revolution in literary form. The contributions to the “readies” run the 
gamut in terms of content, but they tend to conform to Brown’s notion 
of accelerating language either through altering or omitting punctu -
ation, or through the ellipsis of words. The sequential juxtaposition  
of Pound’s, Williams’s, and Kreymbourg’s seemingly perfunctory con -
tributions to The Readies  cannot be accidental. Pound’s “Highbrow’s 
Translation” is more of a lowbrow translation of Horace:
82 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
hIghBrow’ S tra NSlatIoN fro M horace
(Periscos o di)
The Persian buggahs, Joe
Strike me as=a=rotten show,
Stinking of nard and=musk
Over the whole of their rind and husk;
W earing their soft=shell clothes
Whichever way the wind blows,
The Persian buggahs, Joe,
Strike me as=a=rotten show.46
Pound’s poem is hardly “highbrow,” but rather doggerel—  homophobic, 
Orientalist, and resentful. Perhaps to suit the context of the anthology, 
Pound transforms the original Horace poem condemning luxury into  
a modernist condemnation of ornate language. The equals signs in  
the poem seem not to be integral to the poem’s meaning—  but instead 
perhaps almost to parody the reading machine as not introducing 
something new into the field of poetics, as not in fact revolutionizing 
the word.
The Williams poem that follows seems not to treat the reading 
machine seriously—  or rather to treat the machine as the reduction of 
poetry to exact rhyme, producing a meaningless total equivalence be-  
tween words:
read Ie PoMe
Grace-  face: hot-  pot: lank-  spank: meat-  eat: hash-  cash: sell-  well: old-  sold: 
sink-  
wink: deep-  sleep: come-  numb: dum-  rum: some-  bum47
Like Pound’s “translation,” Williams’s “Readie Pome” would seem to 
venture into primitivist/futurist territory, benignly rhyming itself into 
mnemonic numbness. “lank-  spank: meat-  eat: hash-  cash.” These are 
masturbatory mnemonics—  undermining any sort of collective “logo -
cinematic” ( Jolas’s term) idealism that the project of The Readies  might 
entail. Williams’s poem enacts the getting rid of “useless words” advo -
cated by Brown: but why rhyme individual words, other than to create 
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  83
doggerel?48 The words that should prece de rhyme-  endings in any tra -
ditional verse structure are presumably removed, creating an effect of 
radical ellipsis. Even the two syllables of the word “poem” are com -
pressed into one. The reading machine is here understood as introduc -
ing a kind of optical and sonic shorthand: evoking a verbal intensity 
through sonic mirroring or through pure rhyme. Like Williams’s poem, 
Kreymbourg’s poem that follows thematizes its own suspicion of the 
reading machine. Kreymbourg’s contribution is an iambic tetrameter 
couplet with a feminine ending, formulaic and parodic at the same time:
regret S
Old man Kreymbourg has grown too seedy
T o write Bob Brown a speedy readie.49
Kreymbourg, the editor of the influential (by then defunct) journal 
Others , poeticizes his own inability to contribute a poem. Kreymbourg 
is too slow to match the speed demanded of a readie writer. In the face 
of a radical transformation of reading, he, too, can only fall back on the 
most traditional of forms.
Stein’s contribution to The Readies  is a witty rejoinder to Brown’s 
exaltation of erasure and linguistic acceleration. Stein had already in 
1929 composed her portrait of Brown titled “ Absolutely as Bob Brown 
or Bobbed Brown.” Sent to Brown in 1930, Stein’s readie, “W e Came.  
A History,” arrived “in two parts that together fill one cahier.  . . . The 
second part appears to be the readie proper, although Brown published 
both parts as she obviously sent them to him.”50 In contrast to Pound’s 
homophobic “translation,” Stein’s contribution is remarkably insightful 
into the processes by which victors write history:
Historically there=Is no disaster because= Those who make history=Cannot 
be overtaken=As they will make=History which they do=Because it is 
necessary=That every one will=Begin to know that=They must know 
that=History is what it is=Which is as they do=Know that history is 
not=Just what every one=Does who comes and=Prefers days to more  . . .51
The identity of the “we” in the poem is left indeterminate. Whereas 
Pound’s translation parodically presumes that “Joe,” his assumed every -
man reader, will share his suspicion of “Persian buggahs,” Stein’s “W e 
84 Bob Brown, “Inforg”
Came” offers a flexible “we.” Whoever “we” are, we are presumably a  
collectivity because of a shared migration. Stein’s poem is eminently 
cosmopolitan in its inclusiveness, whereas Pound’s is chauvinistic in its 
demonization of a presumed other. Stein’s “readie,” so far as I am able to 
ascertain, is the only instance in her writing in which she employs equals 
signs as a mark of punctuation. For Stein (who was so extraordinarily 
self-  conscious in her use of punctuation) to use equals signs, we might 
surmise, was not only a way to speed her writing, but also a way of  
suggesting a radical grammatical equivalence that would recognize that 
“history is not=Just what every one=Does.”
Coda: Beyond the Paper  
Principle/Beyond National Poetries?
Jacques Derrida’s description of the effects of the word processor sounds 
remarkably like a description of the reading machine:
[The computer] restores a quasi immediacy to the text, a desubstantialized 
substance, more fluid, lighter, and so closer to speech, and even to so-  called 
interior speech. This is also a question of speed and rhythm: it goes 
faster—  faster than us; it surpasses us.  . . . 
The dematerialized letter moves faster than sound, faster than cogni -
tion—  it crosses borders without needing its papers in order.52
The reading machine speeds cognition—  in fact, it aspires to overcome 
sensory overload through placing the desubstantialized word directly 
into the mind of the reader, who is now more of a seer, who through 
sheer power of will, along with the prosthetic powers of the reading 
machine, can absorb vast amounts of information instantaneously.
Such would be a utopian/futurist projection of the reading machine’s 
potential to overcome speech and the local. But Brown, I have argued, 
is more conflicted. He wants to preserve the exotic, and yet his machine 
eliminates all barriers to communication by transmitting language 
directly into the mind of the reader. The French writer Jacques Roubaud 
has recently posed a somewhat analogous parodic program that would 
eliminate the need for translation. Each paragraph of Roubaud’s essay 
on poetry in translation begins with an @, as if to mimic the immediacy 
 Bob Brown, “Inforg”  85
of the e-  mail address’s equation of the personal name and the institu -
tional address:
@10.4 The general opening of markets  . . . is going to put poetry in an 
even more precarious position.  . . . 
@10.6 For poetry encounters very unusual customs obstacles.  . . . I am 
talking about the language border, and the need for translation, which 
makes the cost of transportation from one language to another truly  
prohibitive.  . . . 
@10.6 There are two radical solutions to this problem. The first is radi -
cal: eliminate  dominated language poetry.
@10.7 The second solution is similar to the first, or even further: elimi -
nate the difficulties of translation through general standardization, and 
adapt the modes of poetic expression of the dominant universal language, 
which is English.53
Roubaud, like Mallarmé, admits to being an Anglophile—  and thus his 
program is not only parodic, it is self-  parodic. As a poet who writes in 
French, Roubaud is advocating the elimination not only of his medium 
but of his native language. Since he has access to English, and since 
much of his poetry has been translated into English, Roubaud might 
not in fact suffer from his advocacy of Global English. He is not opti -
mistic about the fate of poetry in languages other than English—  but 
the point of his parody, as I take it, is that poetry preserves the local and 
resists translation, and that poetry is particularly worth preserving in  
an age of instantaneous global communication. Like Brown, Roubaud 
employs parody in part to resist an unreflective nostalgia. The reading 
machine parodies both a utopian desire for a universal language and a 
dystopian mistrust of language as a medium. Brown’s machine implies a 
“translation app,” to use the most up-  to- date lingo of the iPhone (which 
can wirelessly access virtually limitless quantities of poetry in multiple 
languages in over two hundred countries). And yet perhaps poetry is 
still, as the cliché (often attributed to Robert Frost) would have it, “what 
gets lost in translation”—  from language to language as well as from 
voice to page to screen. Perhaps poetry remains a particularly stubborn 
ghost in the machine—  an untranslatable otherness hidden within even 
the ghostliest Ameri can projections of the word of the future.
This page intentionally left blank 
873
HUMAN UNIVERSITY
CHARLES OLSON AND THE 
EMBODIMENT OF INFORMATION
There is no limit to what you can know. Or there is only in the sense that 
you don’t find what you don’t seek to know. There is no truth at all, of 
course, in the modern velleity (the lowest degree of desire) that you can’t 
know everything.
— Charles Olson, The Special View of History
His attention was constantly changing focus, from the rods and cones in 
a pigeon’s eye to the drift of the continents.  . . . Olson wanted his students 
to achieve vertically the entire horizon of human knowledge.
— Guy Davenport, The Geography of the Imagination
From the 1949 “Kingfishers” to the later Maximus Poems , Charles  
 Olson personifies the technological and epistemological pressures 
of a postwar United States whose information production and stor-  
age capacities had grown exponentially within a few decades.1 Olson’s 
work—  perhaps more so than any other poet of the period—  bears wit -
ness to the glut of information at mid-  century. Olson’s field poetics are 
premised on the idea that the “poet–  pedagogue” must expose him-   or 
herself to the broadest possible range of information—  for Olson, this 
results in a sharpening rather than a diminution of the poet’s atten-  
tion. Contemporaries often described Olson as both an intellectual and 
a physical giant (he was six feet six), remarkable in his capacity to absorb 
information. Steve McCaffery has recently described him as “the exem -
plary poet of the Cybernetic Age,” and suggested that “with the earth  
on the brink of ecological disaster and language enmashed in the age  
of information, Olson appears as a prophet and perhaps a destroying 
88 Human University
angel.”2 Olson was among the first to use the term “postmodern,” and his 
conflicted embrace of cybernetics was closely tied to his understanding 
of the new postwar epoch.3 Olson himself wrote dramatically that he 
had “sacrificed every thing” in his “attempt to acquire complete / concen -
tration.”4 This chapter explores how Olson fashioned himself as both a 
hero and a victim of information overload, and suggests that his engage -
ment with information is key to his poetics.
Olson’s two central poetic influences, William Carlos Williams and 
Ezra Pound, had both thoroughly indicted the system of American edu -
cation before the war.5 Olson follows in the footsteps of Pound and 
Williams in leaving behind an unfinished epic poem—  but whereas 
Pound and Williams sought forms of modernist knowledge, I suggest 
that Olson resigns himself instead to the less epistemologically certain 
category of information. For Robert von Hallberg, “Olson the poet is 
not a maker but an expositor; what matters to him is the poem’s last 
word: information.”6 Like Olson, Williams believed that poetry could 
fulfill a unique epistemological function, serving to unify otherwise dis -
parate and/or overly institutionalized forms of knowledge. Williams 
was never able to complete The Embodiment of Knowledge , his searing 
late 1920s indictment of American higher education. For Williams, “W e 
are in that stage: ‘the more you study the less you know’; which is per -
fectly true—  unless you go through—  to what?—  to stillness, to that basis 
on which the modern excellence of the best new poetry is founded.”7 
Poetry, as “the only articulate form,” serves for Williams as a means by 
which to see the world more clearly.8 For Williams, “data should be pres -
ent in activities, which, in particular, have newly organized their mate -
rial, such as, let us say, in poetry. How better than in poetry, that has 
undergone a revolution.”9 By the mid-  1940s, Williams had increasingly 
turned toward chronicling the local by way of historical and found doc -
uments. In part as a reaction to the dehumanization of the war, a poem 
had become for Williams a “machine made of words,” as he put it in the 
1944 preface to The Wedge .10 The citizens of Williams’s Paterson, New 
Jersey, like the citizens of Olson’s Gloucester, Massachusetts, “because 
they neither know the sources nor the sills of their / disappointments 
walk outside their bodies aimlessly.”11 Paterson  and Maximus  could both 
be said to counter rootlessness through the creation of epic (perhaps 
even partly mock epic) protagonists who are mythically connected to 
their respective townscapes. In both cases, embodied (or internalized) 
 Human University  89
information about the local arguably becomes a means by which local 
citizenship can be made universal, bypassing the triumphant national -
ism of the postwar United States.
During the decade from the early 1940s, when he worked at the 
Office of W ar Information, to the early 1950s, when he was rector of 
Black Mountain College, Olson repeatedly described an aspiration to 
overcome conditions similar to those that Theodor Adorno and Max 
Horkheimer contemporaneously referred to as the dialectic of enlight -
enment, wherein the domination of nature by rational means—  but not 
to rational ends—  had led to the exponential growth of the culture in-  
dus try and a corresponding decline of general knowledge regarding true 
sociopolitical conditions. Olson’s political views were less fervently left -
ist than those of Adorno and Horkheimer, and the comparison should 
not be overstated; nonetheless, the three thinkers share a sense of pro -
found frustration at the general state of knowledge within American 
universities and the mass media in the war’s immediate aftermath. The 
war affected Olson deeply.12 It was, in some sense, Olson’s revision of 
Williams to turn himself, as poet, into a machine made of informa-  
tion. As Don Byrd writes, Olson “does not imagine the poet as an arti -
san as Pound or Williams do, but as a biological machine.”13 With its 
direct quotations from Norbert W einer’s Cybernetics , Olson’s 1949 
“Kingfishers” most clearly reveals the poet’s interest in information the -
ory. For a generation of poets, it took on additional resonance as the 
opening poem of Donald Allen’s New American Poetry  anthology. Al-  
though the term “feedback” (or “feed-  back”) had been used in the con -
text of radio and electronics since the 1920s, according to the OED  it 
only began to be used in relation to social organization or to biological 
organisms in the 1940s. “The Kingfishers” features the concept of feed -
back prominently:
Not one death but many,
not accumulation but change, the feed-  back proves, the feed-  back is
the law  . . . 
W e can be precise. The factors are
in the animal and/or the machine the factors are
communication and/or control, both involve
the message. And what is the message? The message is
90 Human University
a discrete or continuous sequence of measurable events distributed in 
time14
Under the banner of Heraclitean flux—  “Into the same river no man 
steps twice”—  Olson is able to reconnect mind and body by way of re-  
course to Wiener’s Cybernetics .15 Invoking Wiener’s concept of feedback 
enables Olson to envision the (re)embodiment of information within a 
postwar context in which scientific knowledge seemed to have over -
whelmed all possibility of its being humanely controlled. “The message” 
is a continuous one, and it is overpowering, particularly given the poem’s 
earlier reference to the war (“not one death but many”). For Olson the 
“will to change” can impede the onslaught of death and indifference. As 
Olson’s “anti–  W aste Land ,”16 “The Kingfishers” does not deny the chaos 
into which W estern civilization has fallen, but contra Eliot, Olson does 
not suggest that his readers can reclaim that lost coherency through 
recourse to Anglo-  American cultural or religious tradition: for Olson 
“the field” of cultural information must be far wider.
Within the typescript of Cybernetics , which he first encountered at 
Black Mountain College in 1947 in advance of its publication, Olson 
found a grim prognosis for the postwar era: “This is the world of Bel-  
sen and Hiroshima,” Wiener declared. “I write in 1947, and I am com -
pelled to say that [to have a society based on human values] is a very 
slight hope,” he continued.17 “The present time is the age of communi -
cation and control.”18 It was during this period (the Macy Conferences 
ran from 1943 to 1953) that information theory took shape, and, as  
N. Katherine Hayles and Mark Hansen have argued, that information 
came to be constructed as a disembodied medium.19 For Hayles, “the 
post–  W orld W ar II era  . . . was ripe for theories that reified information 
into a free-  floating, decontextualized, quantifiable entity.”20 Within 
recent new media scholarship, there has been fairly broad consensus 
that, in Bernadette W egenstein’s words, “the body is our most funda -
mental medium of knowledge and experience,” or as Hayles puts it, 
“information is never disembodied  . . . messages don’t flow by them -
selves, and  . . . epistemology isn’t a word floating through the thin, thin 
air until it is connected up with incorporating practices.”21 Despite his 
sexism (discussed below), Olson, in common with many contemporary 
feminist scholars of new media, was suspicious of the dematerialization 
and disembodiment of information. Olson consistently championed an 
 Human University  91
embodied consciousness that valued self-  reflexivity. The persona Olson 
created—  that of an “infovore” struggling to process information con -
tinually within an outsized, ungainly body—  insisted on a cybernetic 
subjectivity.
Olson had always been an omnivorous gatherer of information, keenly 
interested in the nature and transmission of knowledge. As early as 1931 
he writes, “Everything absorbs my attention. It is a tendency I have to 
fight against.”22 F . O. Matthiessen brought Olson to Harvard in 1934 be-  
cause Olson had collected valuable primary-  source Melville documents. 
Finding himself under the influence of Edward Dahlberg and unable to 
assimilate his considerable knowledge of Melville into a conventional 
dissertation, Olson left Harvard, and repeatedly expressed frustration 
at the stultified nature of conventional mid-  century academia. Olson 
would have concurred wholeheartedly with Williams’s assessment that 
“no student nowadays is given to understand the meaning of knowledge 
(or of college)—  a necessary view of the field—  but is lost—  brutalized 
by facts, brutalized by a sleet of information—  deaf ened into a general 
language—  dwarfed in understanding—  made into a cock-  eyed grotesque 
of a man to perform a given task.”23 Olson echoes this complaint about 
specialization on many occasions, particularly during his time at Black 
Mountain College. Olson, like Williams, believed that “everything should 
always be taught at once.”24 Poetic education, Williams makes clear, is 
an antidote to information saturation: “Mountains of dead words, cem -
eteries of words befog the mind.  . . . If he has written poetry it may help. 
He knows at least something of the difficulties of form. Style he takes 
to be a word like the others. It is all one thing.”25 The way to cleanse  
the words was not simply to strip them of their debased mass-  cultural 
meanings, but to revivify them through poetic arrangement. Form, in 
other words, could serve as a means by which to filter language that had 
lost its referential specificity.
Rather than loosely connecting history and myth through what he 
labeled the faulty “ego-  system” of Pound in the Cantos , Olson’s “proprio -
ceptive” method is meant to create a more immediate, vital sense of the 
poet engaged with unprocessed data.26 Logic and categorization are in 
effect counter-  cybernetic for Olson—  they interrupt the immediacy of 
the interchange between organism and environment, between poet and 
perception: “Logic and classification  . . . intervene at just the moment 
they become more than the means they are, are allowed to become ways 
92 Human University
as end instead of ways to end, eNd, which is never more than this 
instant, than you, figure it out.”27 The body, as well as the voice, of the 
poet must be perfectly attuned to its surroundings, as well as to its  
part in what Marx would call “species-  being.” Don Byrd recalls Robert 
Duncan in 1983 claiming that “Olson and I are cybernetic poets. It is 
what distinguishes us the others of our generation, even Creeley.”28 
What Duncan seems to have meant was that his, and Olson’s, interest 
in mythography and measure had found an important epistemological 
analogue in cybernetics.
According to the philosopher of technology Albert Borgmann, “Infor -
mation led an inconspicuous semantic life until in the second half of the 
twentieth century.”29 The rise of information theory in the late 1940s—  
in the work of figures such as Wiener, Claude Shannon, and V annevar 
Bush—  reinforced the distinction to be made between “knowledge” and 
“information.”30 By way of an anecdote, Borgmann exemplifies the period 
from the late 1940s to the early 1960s when the word “knowledge” could 
still be used somewhat interchangeably with “information”: “In 1960, 
Fritz Machlup published The Production and Distribution of Knowledge 
in the United States , a title that sounds odd today. It is information,  
we would think, that can be produced and distributed. The thought  
did not occur to Machlup. He acknowledged the rise of information 
and considered its inclusion in his title, but in the end he clung to the 
tra dition that began with Plato wherein the grand and explicit topic is 
knowledge while information is dimly perceived as trouble.”31 Para -
doxically, Olson’s narrative of intellectual history, while seemingly Pla -
tonic in its emphasis on human universals, is in fact deeply anti-  Platonic, 
locating the essential decline of the W estern polis within Athenian 
rationalism—  in Olson’s terms, this is the transition in method from 
Herodotus to Thucydides, in which  muthos  or myth (with its cognate 
sense of “mouth”) had been denounced in favor of logos  (in Olson’s 
terms, disembodied literate reason). In championing a fusion between 
muthos and logos, Olson was able, at least partly, to reconcile historical 
and mythographic speculation. In epistemological terms, the “mutho -
logic” synthesis allows Olson to maintain a healthy respect for primary 
historical facts (analogous to “information”) at the same time that it 
allows him to resist what he considers the false objectivity of Thucydides 
and Plato (whose writing, for Olson, excessively purports to be rational 
“knowledge”).
 Human University  93
Olson was not an unequivocal champion of Wiener’s Cybernetics , 
although he did successfully recruit Wiener as a trustee of Black Moun -
tain College. In a remarkable 1951 letter to Robert Creeley, he goes so far 
as to link cybernetics to fascism:
Sometime quite recently a door went bang shut, and a “box” of history can 
be seen as such, and put away—  say, the box 500BC–  1950AD
(that is—  to stay on the best known ground—  biochemistry is post-  
modern. And electronics, now, is already a science of communication—  the 
“human” is already the “image” of the computing machine, and the lesson 
(by the substitution of the binary for the decimal in its operation) of its 
better workings32
In Olson’s metanarrative, the pre-  rational (500 BCE) and the post-  
rational (1950 CE) are the grand bookends of history. There are apocalyp -
tic Cold W ar overtones to Olson’s account, but there is also a hopefulness 
that future advances in biochemistry and electronic communication 
might result in new forms of embodiment—  so long as humans are  
not remade in the image of computers.33 Olson’s initial enthusiasm for 
cybernetics as a theoretical grounding for an emergent postliterate 
world was tempered by a deep suspicion of cybernetics as an amoral 
outcome of evolutionary processes. Olson’s letter to Creeley continues:
all these effects, of course, or movements apparently forwarded are “blind,” 
in the sense that they go without any recourse to a series of sanctions, as 
did the previous or modern, philosophy, ethics, and science
an evidence of this, open to all, is the stupidities & dangers of “Cyber -
netics,” which, so far as the noticeable absence in it of grounded human 
sanction goes, most resembles that side of collectivism which we loosely 
call fascism34
Olson at this point seems to have been unaware of Wiener’s 1950 
Human Use of Human Beings  (though he later owned the book), in 
which Wiener expressed similar concerns.35 Olson suggests to Creeley 
that “ the e NgINeer is the hero  of the system we call the weSt,” and 
that as a result of the heroic elevation of technical man, matter became 
divided from what “‘spirit’ or whatever word you use to denominate the 
organic force which [is] the human.”36 Olson’s organicism manifests 
94 Human University
itself not only in his descriptions of his own body, but also in his 
descriptions of the two communities in which he felt most at home: 
Black Mountain College and Gloucester. Olson called Black Mountain 
“the biggest city he had ever known. He described it as more ‘like a 
human individual than it is like anything else.  .  .  . Black Mountain’s 
secret is a combination as ineluctable as that of the human organism—  
bones, and the breathing apparatus of flesh, the pores.’”37 The relation 
of bodily organism to social organization (or polis ) is a main concern  
of Olson’s mature writing; he recurrently described himself (and/or 
Maximus) as incorporating Gloucester and Black Mountain within him -
self (and vice versa).
For Olson, written language is radically reductive of the total experi -
ence of the “human universe,” in large part because writing externalizes 
information, delimiting the field of discursive possibility: “For any of us, 
at any instant, are juxtaposed to any experience, even an overwhelming 
single one, on several more planes than the arbitrary and discursive 
which we inherit can declare.”38 The introduction of technicized mem -
ory in the form of writing is catastrophic: “The moment you exaggerate 
the function of discourse in the plane of knowledge or the intellect—  
the moment you remove memory from the human organism, or, make 
it merely an agent of knowledge instead of an agent of re-  projection—  
you make energy mechanical by removing from its direction & end the 
very participant which can demand that content can serve a purpose 
other than a material one.”39 For Olson, when hypomnesis  (Bernard 
Stiegler’s term for technically stored media, including writing) displaces 
anamnesis  (Stiegler’s term for embodied memory) there results a radical 
narrowing of the range of human thought—  hypomnesis detracts from 
our ability to perceive the physical world around us, as when Olson 
compares Thucydides to “the latest finest tape recorder.”40 As he puts it 
in Human Universe , “W e have lived long in a generalizing time, at least 
since 450 B.C.” Hence the need for a recuperation of spoken language: 
“Logos, or discourse, for example, in that time, so worked its abstrac -
tions into our concept and use of language that language’s other func -
tion, speech, seems so in need of restoration that several of us go back 
to hieroglyphs or to ideograms to right the balance. (The distinction 
here is between language as the act of the instant and language as the act 
of thought about the instant.)”41 Even if Olson did not harbor as deep  
a confidence as did Pound in the transparent power of the ideogram, 
 Human University  95
Olson nonetheless saw linear, alphabetical writing as inimical to spon -
taneity. The classificatory and bureaucratic functions of W estern writ -
ing concerned him even more than the actual writing system. For Olson, 
the arrival of Greek rationalism led to a disembodied consciousness 
incapable of fully perceiving the natural and historical world. Olson’s 
ideal of embodied knowledge insists on an intimate relation between 
primitive facts and the most current of events. In his “Starting from 
Where Y ou Are” course at Black Mountain in 1954, he proposed to study 
the present by way of the most immediate materials on hand, such as 
local newspapers. In a 1956 “Draft Plan for the College,” he writes, 
“Knowledge, at Black Mountain, in that usual sense is also fixed as what 
we take it to be, what in the 20th century it has become: news, hot news. 
So we don’t treat it as something called a ‘body’ of knowledge, canned 
like Army food, to be fed out like a spam.”42 A “body of knowledge” for 
Olson could not be an independent, abstract entity. If it became that,  
it would merely mimic the mass-  produced ideologies of the twentieth 
century.
Olson’s pre-  Maximus  attempts to write a long poem in the late 1940s 
reveal him struggling to reconcile poetry, mythography, and historical 
data.43 In a 1948 outline for the long poem he intended to call West , he 
proposed that he would “reverse the motion of Homer, Dante, Melville, 
start in Asia with . . . Lao-  T se (and the horizontal, anthropological Am 
Indian society).”44 Olson even seems to have considered naming the 
poem’s central character “Orpheus W est.” The impracticalities of such a 
sweeping epic soon become apparent. “Is it possible to write a long poem 
called weSt?” he wondered. “Or is the American experience too stiff, too 
unfabled for use?”45 In a way, Olson had already answered this question 
in the concluding pages of Call Me Ishmael . The stiffness of American 
subject matter was not the problem; rather, the problem was selecting 
from a vast quantity of fabled materials without becoming the exclusive 
arbiter of those materials’ universal significance. In a 1953 fragment de-  
scribing his decision to abandon the poem, he writes, “I begin to think 
that [ West ] better be something as wide and stupid as aMerIca. But in 
either case it was never meant to be ‘history.’ And so it presents the usual 
problem: how to do it in what way to make it, like they used to say, uni -
voisal.”46 The answer was, as he had suggested in “Projective V erse” in 
1950, to reject the conventional “ego position” of the epic poet: “ MySelf, 
then, in this poem, excluded as person to the PoeM, no personal memory, 
96 Human University
quite the opposite, archetypal memory. ”47 In 1947, Olson wrote that he 
wanted his poetry to “put everything back in the box of facts.”48 The 
parodically overextended character of Maximus  represents Olson’s 
attempt to do justice the vastness of his materials. Maximus, as But -
terick has suggested, is fundamentally a figure meant to test “what size 
man can be once more capable of, once the turn of the flow of his ener -
gies that I speak of as the wIll to cohere  is admitted, and its energy 
taken up.”49 At the same time, the figure of Maximus demonstrates the 
impossibility of finding total coherence through a single epic persona.
One of the overriding questions of The Maximus Poems  (posed by 
Maximus to himself ) is “Where shall you listen / when all is become 
billboards, when, all, even silence, is spray-  gunned?”50 It is no accident 
that the first song of Maximus  notes the pressures of advertising culture 
on the landscape:
Colored pictures
Of all things to eat: dirty
Postcards
And words, words, words
All over everything
No eyes or ears left
T o do their own doings (all
Invaded, appropriated, outraged, all senses
Including the mind, that worker on what is51
Olson consistently represents modern man as overcome by a deluge of 
language and information. The deluge is not only delivered by means  
of television and other mass-  mediated means; Olson is fiercely critical 
of almost all mid-  century bureaucratic institutions, and their role in 
accumulating disinterested data. For Olson, facts have no meaning unless 
they are qualitatively (re)constituted within a body or polis. The state, 
like the university, generally obstructs the individual’s access to knowl -
edge, not through scarcity but through profusion.
In the “Bibliography of America for Ed Dorn,” Olson refers obliquely 
to quantity as “King Numbers” and to quality as “King Shit.”52 Quantity 
for Olson can have the effect of either focusing the attention (if a law 
can be derived) or dispersing it (if the information remains undigested, 
or lawless). In the main, however, Olson was suspicious of quantity (not 
 Human University  97
to be confused with “measure”) and associated it with postwar Ameri -
can mass consumption. Olson wanted to temper his tendency toward 
being an intellectual and sensual omnivore (a lover of quantity) by being 
what he referred to as an “amorvore” (a lover of quality):
All,
has no honor as quantity.
And the attention
in each of us,
is that one, not the other
not the perfect one. Beauty,
is too quick
for time
If man is omnivore,
and he is, he eats anything
every so often, he is also
amorvore
as well53
Olson felt that virtually every aspect of American society in the twen -
tieth century had become overcome by these dual monarchs, King 
Numbers and King Shit. From the postal service in which his father 
had worked for most of his life to the emergent Melville “industry” (as 
he calls it in 1950), Olson saw himself at odds with a culture that valued 
quantity of data over quality of information. Nevertheless, Olson prized 
many of the products of specialized American research, and liked, for 
instance, to consider Black Mountain a more humane, more embodied 
version of Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study. Olson recognized 
that the American research university, particularly in the sciences, had 
contributed to revolutionizing knowledge within the span of his own 
lifetime. “Look, one of the reasons why I stress American scholarship,” 
he writes to Cid Corman,
IS, that the American PuSh is not at all all machines and engineers
the fact  is, that, Americans are putting out a body of research rou Nd 
the world , which is the kind of grounding on which that culture of 
Europe rested rests is now buried in here lies the anthill54
98 Human University
Not only has the flood of American information all but drowned Europe, 
it has also drowned out the ability of the American intellectuals who 
produced it to process it. Olson recognized that the expatriate auto -
didactic vision of Pound was anachronistic in the postwar period. The 
American technocratic worldview, for better and for worse, had entirely 
suffused the “body of research” being spread “ rou Nd the world .”
Olson’s critique of American universities is unsparing, and often 
reveals him at his most didactic. As he emphatically puts it in the open -
ing of “The Gate and the Center,” “ kNowledge  either goes for the  
center or it’s inevitably a State Whore—  which American and W estern 
education generally is, has been, since the beginning.”55 Olson insisted 
so strongly on the primacy of the “poet–  pedagogue” that some, such as 
von Hallberg, have suggested that his poetry was always subservient  
to his larger polemics. Ben Friedlander writes, “Olson was not literary 
in orientation: that is, he was not interested in making finished, free-  
standing works of art, objects to be appreciated or consumed as ends in 
themselves. He was, instead, engaged in writing as an activity subser -
vient to the production of knowledge.”56 Though I largely concur with 
Friedlander’s and von Hallberg’s emphasis on Olson as a producer of 
knowledge (or more specifically, “information”) as opposed to a poetic 
perfectionist, I wonder if readers need to choose between the two. Olson 
clearly believed in a poetry informed by history, but he also described 
improvisation as central to his poetics, and acknowledged that “it is very 
difficult, to be both a poet, and an historian.”57 Friedlander also points 
out that “Olson produced texts as a way of sharing his findings and 
participating in a community of writers and researchers  . . . the larger 
shape of his writings is only discernible in his total output, which is not 
a matter of books alone. In his final years, Olson abandoned the book as 
ultimate horizon and worked instead to produce an archive.”58 Olson’s 
archival method can be said not only to apply to Olson’s continual search 
for primary information, but also to his attempt to manage his own body 
of work. Olson seems to have known the truth of Friedlander’s sugges-
tion that his work is best approached as a “total output.”
In Olson’s most direct account of the mind–  body relation, he defines 
“proprioception” as “the data of depth of sensibility / the ‘body’ of us as 
object which spontaneously or of its own order produces experience of, 
‘depth’ Viz SeNSIBI lIty w IthIN the orga NISM  / By MoveMeNt 
of ItS ow N tISSueS.”59 Proprioception allows the new culture of 
 Human University  99
unlimited, but non-  located, information to find a home within the 
human universe of the bio-  cosmo-  logical (I choose this awkward locu -
tion to suggest that Olson considers his universe to be a mortal one, but 
nonetheless still a universe). In the well-  known lines that lend their title 
to the film Polis Is This , Olson cribs directly from Alfred North White -
head’s Adventures of Ideas . Olson’s gestures during a filmed reading of the 
poem in 1966 suggest that the “this” in “polis is this” is Olson’s own body:
An American
is a complex of occasions,
themselves a geometry of spatial nature.
I have this sense,
that I am one
with my skin
Plus this—  plus this:
that forever the geography
which leans in
on me I compel
backwards I compel Gloucester
to yield, to
change
Polis
is this.60
Proprioception allows us to become one with our surroundings, to get 
back to “our own primary,” as he puts it in Call Me Ishmael . Olson is  
at one with his skin at the same time that he is at one with his poem. 
The antidote to a limitless universe of knowledge is not a renunciation 
of universal themes, but rather an intensification of attention, or as he 
sometimes puts it, concentration. For Olson, concentration must be a 
fully embodied act, a never-  ending “plus this.” “I compel” is repeated 
twice. Olson is undoubtedly thinking of the etymological sense of “com -
pel” as “to drive together” or to “bring together in one place.” The land -
scape of Gloucester leans against Maximus, to which he responds by 
himself leaning back against the town.
100 Human University
As the embodiment of human/polis reconciliation, Olson must open 
himself to as many phenomena as he is humanly able. Olson (or by 
proxy Maximus) is never quite at home in the tragically flawed polis of 
Gloucester. As much as he loathed Aristotle in other contexts, Olson 
would have approved of his notion that a man must be either super -
human or a beast to live outside of the polis. Often the phenomena to 
which Olson must expose himself are profoundly dislocating:
It could be put this way: any phenomenon, to be experienced, takes precise 
engagement; and that the experience of several phenomena increases the 
precision brought to bear. My own sense is that there can’t be enough, and 
that one of the extraordinary virtues of a human being is (a), that he can 
take so much, and (b), the more that he takes the more he can, and the 
more he can give—  that is the greater, by intensity, is his precision. And the 
reason is very much tied to field—  to that which I have called the virtue of 
totality: that experience is such (is so rich), that the more kinds of experi -
ence one includes (the more phenomena and actions) the finer and faster 
is the attention brought to bear on all succeeding ones, and, by the bril -
liance of memory, on what has been known. This constellating of experi -
ence and attentions is such a breeder of values that one can say that just 
here is the gain which has undone all hierarchy—  that just here is where 
the discovery of value can be said to lie, in this increase in the precision of 
attention by the width and depth of the phenomena allowed in to demand 
attention.61
Contrary to what we might expect, the “virtue of totality” does not 
entail a fixed system of belief—  rather Olson suggests that “field” is anti-  
hierarchical. W e cannot know our own perspective unless we derive our 
knowledge from outside-  in (from totality to cogito), rather than, as in 
Olson’s understanding of Descartes, seeking our knowledge from inside-  
out (from cogito to totality).
Concentration is a key word for Olson, as in “Letter 6” of the Maxi-
mus Poems :
Eyes,
& polis.
fishermen.
& poets
 Human University  101
or in every human head I’ve known is
busy
both:
the attention, and
the care
however much each of us
chooses our own
kin and
concentration62
For Olson, the community (the polis) and care are coextensive—  they 
arose with the first cities, rather than emerging from the rationalistic 
culture of post-  Thucydidean Greece. One must concentrate on some 
form of place and people in order to have an identity. Concentration  
for Olson is profoundly autopoetic, as he suggests near the ending of 
The Maximus Poems :
Concentrate
one’s own form, holding
every automorphism63
For Olson, an automorphic self-  consciousness was the means by which 
one could transform copious data into meaningful information. In the 
comprehensive notion of “field” which dominates Olson’s poetics from 
“Projective V erse” onward, what allows the perceiver to assimilate dis -
parate facts is precise concentration. Olson sometimes referred to the 
totality of concentration (or attention) as “stance,” as in the “Chiasmus” 
lectures: “Stance is very much a source and result of such maximal 
attention. And space could be called the inclusion of all the possible 
stances to all the possible facts or objects or acts which I am here in-  
sisting is the phenomenal man is required [sic] to include within him -
self.”64 Space, then, like its counterpart “field,” is not only physical, but 
also mental—  an ability to hold together abundant thoughts. Olson was 
fond of Keats’s “negative capability”; it suggested that the poet could  
be a nexus of contradictory ideas, held in place by the poet’s unique 
embodied perspective, his “stance.” As he put it elsewhere in the same 
lectures, “What I know is the experience of bringing all to bear on  
anything.”65
102 Human University
The late poem “The T elesphere” is sometimes taken to be a crude 
expression of Olson’s loneliness in Gloucester after the death of his wife, 
but the title suggests that we might also read the poem as part of his 
larger desire to embrace what we might now think of as the “infosphere”:
Gather a body to me
like a bear. T ake it on
my left leg and hold it off
for love-  making, man or woman
boy or girl in the enormity
of the enjoyment that it is
flesh, that it is to be loved, that
I desire it, that without it
my whole body is a hoop
empty and like steel
to be iron to grasp
someone else in myself
like those arms which hold
all the staves together
and make a man, if now as cold and hot
as a bear, out of me.66
Olson was hardly shy in making his body the parodic subject of his 
poems—  here his desire is literally omnivorous as a bear’s, desiring any 
sort of body with which to commune. Indeed, the body of Maximus 
often takes on the proportions of a parodic analogue for imperial over -
stretch. The hoop cannot contain the staves: the man cannot retain  
his loved ones; the man cannot restrain himself; his country cannot re-  
strain itself. Such sentiments are echoed loudly in the concluding page 
of The Maximus Poems . Although Olson was certainly a misogynist and 
a homophobe—  who favored almost exclusively homosocial surround -
ings—  he also, as in “The T elesphere,” presents himself as something of 
a Whitmanic pansexual being. “The T elesphere” demonstrates that 
“stance,” or concentration, incorporates (in the literal sense of the word) 
sexual desire. Olson’s sacrifice of himself to knowledge, as Michael 
Davidson points out, is not only a sacrifice of his own sexuality, but also 
of the agency of the women of the polis or of the sphere of learning.  
Of the lines “I’ve sacrificed every thing, including sex and woman / —  or 
 Human University  103
lost them—  to this attempt to acquire complete / concentration,” David -
son writes, “If this is a confession of vulnerability and limit on Olson’s 
part, it is no less a statement of personal resistance by which ‘sex and 
woman’ are kept out of a city they had yet to occupy.”67
Davidson is right to note the exclusionary and gendered nature of 
Olson’s polis, whether at Black Mountain or at Gloucester. Another, 
more proximate observer of Olson’s gender politics, Robert Duncan, 
was more sympathetic to Olson’s self-  sacrificial claims. Duncan’s extra -
ordinary account of Olson’s death demonstrates that Olson retained  
his self-  parodic maximalist persona to the very end. In a letter to Jess 
Collins, Duncan describes in intimate detail conversations he had with 
Olson as he was dying of liver cancer. The liver/“live-  her” itself becomes 
a gendered organ, as Olson reflects on the disease (if we take its root 
cause to be alcoholism) that cost him “my wife    my car    my color    and    
myself ”68 Duncan recounts him saying:
“Y ou put it on me  . . . I was not Zeus, but Prometheus  . . . I want you to tell 
me what to do. What does Prometheus do?” But then he went further than 
the person of Prometheus: “What does the liver mean, the live-  her—  the 
doctor said it’s a female disease, cancer of the livery.” And the Liver he saw 
or projected in his talk as the Mother Liver. “Then you are in the House  
of the Mother Liver” I said, and that, as I do, I see him always ahead along 
the way (the way or quest of what those of us who set out in 1950 with a 
mission in poetry were promised to).69
Olson’s feminizes his liver as an odd combination of something like 
mother Earth and a feminized forbidden knowledge (more like Pan -
dora than Prometheus). A mere six months after the Stonewall riots, he 
makes common cause with his most devoted fellow poet, the openly gay 
Duncan, who recognizes in Olson both a friend and a father figure. 
However grandiose (but not without irony) Olson’s choice of Pro -
metheus over Zeus may be, he once again envisions himself as a tragic 
bearer of knowledge, rather than as someone fully in control of knowl -
edge. Later in the exchange, Olson goes even further in allegorizing his 
own failing body:
“This is a civilization, the whole state of things,” he said pointing to his 
guts. It was only towards the close of the séance that I began to realize that 
104 Human University
half his body had indeed been shaved and half shaggy hairy man, visually 
as schizophrenic an emblem as the hermaphrodite. The liver for sure is on 
the right hand side. He was concerned to tell me that he had done his 
work. “I have only Miss Live-  er to do now”—  “The liver won’t de.  . . . de  . . . 
it won’t de,” he couldn’t find the word, “De contaminate” I suggested, not 
very sure in it. “No,” he tried again, “they’ve got a right word for it. W on’t 
de . . . de . . . ,” he couldn’t get it.70
Seemingly searching for the word “detoxify” or “detoxicate,” Olson is left 
without access to information. The man who had embodied informa -
tion now seems effeminized and disembodied by his illness. The anthro -
pomorphization is a total one—  Olson guts are to America as America 
is to Olson’s guts, both are sick and dying. The “pejorocracy” has done 
its worst: no detox is possible. Prometheus meets Pandora as all the 
information in the world is released, only to consume the consumers.
It is Olson’s influential words to Ed Dorn—  pronounced in telegraph-  
style Poundese—  that may best convey his tragically ambivalent relation 
to information:
PrIMary docu MeNtS: And to hook on here is a lifetime of assiduity. 
Best thing to do is to dig one thing or place or man until you yourself know 
more about that than is possible to any other man. It doesn’t matter 
whether it’s Barbed Wire or Pemmican or Paterson or Iowa. Saturate it. 
Beat it.
And then u kNow everything else very fast: one saturation job (it 
might take fourteen years). And you’re in, forever.71
The trouble is that it might take much longer than fourteen years.  
And Dorn might not “ kNow everything else very fast.”72 And he might 
be out, not “in, forever.” Olson’s emphasis on primary documents—  like 
that of modernists such as Pound, Williams, Zukofsky, Dos Passos,  
or Benjamin, to name merely a few—  could not by itself produce and 
sustain a comprehensive body of knowledge. The “saturation job” has 
necessarily to be selective. Fragmented knowledge (or so the metaphor 
runs) remains, like the individual, severed from the collective. In 1946 
Olson speaks of not having time to present to Pound in person his idea 
for a “book on the Human Body. A record in the perfectest language  
I can manage of the heart , lIver, BraINS, kIdNey, the organs, to 
 Human University  105
body them forth, to give a full sense of the instrument of the organ-  
ism, approached on the simplest of premises: viz., the Body  is the first 
and simplest and most unthought of fact of a human life.”73 If the body 
was “the first and simplest . . . fact,” it was also the first and simplest 
limitation. Olson never wrote “the book on the Human Body”; but in 
another sense, The Maximus Poems  are that book. Nearly everything 
Olson wrote was suffused, or saturated, with a thirst for knowledge so 
great that it threatened to undermine the very collectivities—  his family, 
Gloucester, Black Mountain—  that meant so much to him. George But -
terick describes the famous and troubling conclusion to The Maximus 
Poems  as “a catalogue of losses.”74 The conclusion might also be read as 
a retraction—  an apology for a masculinist reduction of the world to 
tangible goods: “my wife    my car    my color    and    myself.”75 At the 
end of Maximus’s exhaustive account of four hundred years of local his -
tory, as well as millennia of mythographical history, it is a paltry list, not 
worthy even of more than one typographical line. The attempt to build 
the polis, to achieve a “heterogeneous” cosmopolitan Gloucester, has 
failed. “But it doesn’t matter—  all goes back to the oNe joB,” the satura -
tion job.76 Olson is at his most humanistic in valuing learning—  colossal, 
eclectic, and mythical—  above all else. W e should continue to be wary  
of Olson’s masculinism and his primitivism, but neither of these terms, 
as applied to Olson, should be understood in their conventional senses.
Carla Billitteri has recently proposed that we read Olson in the con -
text of what she calls his “poetics of transnational utopia.”77 Olson knew 
that, on the face of things, Gloucester had little in common with the 
ancient Phoenician city of T yre—  linking the two was not a matter of 
gratuitous esotericism, but rather a sweeping attempt to find imagina -
tive correspondences between two seemingly unrelated cultures at 
opposite ends of the Atlantic. As Eugene Vydrin describes it, “Proprio -
ception offers a phenomenology of perception whose seat is the individ -
ual body, whose testing ground is language, and whose horizon is human 
movement across the Earth.”78 As a model for the acquisition of knowl -
edge, proprioception insists on an immediacy of engagement between 
mind and body, body and polis, as well as body and planet. In stressing 
movement on a global scale, Olson foregrounds migration as the central 
driving force of historical change. Maximus  is not an epic of place, but 
of space. As Jonathan Skinner has noted, Olson rejects the American 
narrative of the conquest of wilderness.79 Stephen Fredman, drawing a 
106 Human University
line of influence from Emerson and Thoreau, suggests that Olson’s 
privileging of primary facts responds to a pervasive sense of “ground -
lessness”: “Olson and Thoreau use the epistemological imperative that 
one find out the facts for oneself as a primary approach to the problem 
of groundlessness, an approach that can be adopted as spiritual disci -
pline, as political program, and as poetics.  . . . As a political program, it 
proposes that an individual who locates the true facts of his or her own 
condition can be of tremendous use to the community as a resistant 
factor, sustaining the value of the local and the actual against the state, 
the universal, and the eternal.”80 A primary fact, unlike received wisdom, 
can be rearranged and made into an obstacle to the smooth operation  
of an ideology. Though Olson’s transhistorical speculations may strike 
contemporary readers as humanist or universalist in their claims, there 
is also a strong case to be made that Olson’s continual linking of discrete 
“occasions” destabilizes universalist presuppositions. As he put it, his 
goal was to combat “The Big False Humanism / Now On.”81
This inimitable run-  on sentence from The Bibliography on America  
in many respects epitomizes Olson’s relation to scholarly knowledge: 
“So far as ‘scholarship’ might, it will disclose the intimate connection 
between person-  as- continuation-  of- millennia-  by- acts-  of- imagination-  
as- arising-  directly-  from-  fierce-  penetration-  of- all- past-  persons, places, 
things, and actions-  as- data (objects)—  not by fiction to fiction: our own 
‘life’ is too serious a concern for us to be parlayed forward by literary 
antecedence.”82 Olson’s hyphenated list draws on a Jungian rhetoric at 
the same time that it refuses to align itself with any singular cultural 
tradition. “Literary antecedence,” for Olson, speaks to a kind of nation -
alist partiality. Olson demands that we think on a larger scale—  both 
spatially and temporally—  in terms that could be considered analogous 
to those articulated by the “big history” movement.83 His metaphors are 
pervasively masculinist (e.g., “fierce-  penetration”), but his metaphors  
of inclusiveness also stubbornly refuse to sequester knowledge from an 
engagement with the immediacy of perception. Olson’s star rises and 
falls on whether or not we as readers are willing to contemplate “all-  
past-  persons, places, and actions-  as- data.” T o consider all persons, places 
and actions as objects of knowledge  is different from considering them 
as data . T o consider people and things as data is to recognize our own 
role in a continuing process; we, too, are data “to be parlayed forward.” 
In emphasizing the reciprocal nature of perceiver and perceived, Olson 
 Human University  107
echoes both Whitehead’s Process and Reality  and Wiener’s notion of 
feedback loops. For Olson, data is not necessarily or even primarily 
quantitative, but rather elemental in the physical sense: the basic build -
ing material of poetic perception as well as of historical inquiry.
Recent scholarship on Olson has increasingly emphasized ecocriti -
cal, transatlantic, and anticapitalist dimensions of his writing.84 The 
recurrent motif of “The-  man-  with-  the- house-  on- his- head,” which runs 
through the later Maximus  poems, suggests the difficulty of balancing 
polis , oikos  (household), and individual bios (living being). Olson’s most 
elaborate rendering (or arguably plagiarizing) of the “man-  with-  the- 
house-  on- his- head” story, which he found in Charles Godfrey Leland’s 
Algonquin Legends , begins with the single word “chockablock” in the left 
margin.85 Chock-  a- block , according the OED , is a nautical term “said of  
a tackle with the two blocks run close together so that they touch each 
other—  the limit of hoisting; transf.  jammed or crammed close together; 
also of a place or person, crammed with, chock-  full of.” Olson found the 
legend “chock-  a- block” with detail, and he correspondingly abridged 
Leland’s version. “Chock-  a- block” can also refer to the overall form of 
The Maximus Poems . Keeping in mind the latter of half of the OED  
definition, Gloucester could be described as having a “chock-  a- block” 
history, and Olson himself could be described as a “chock-  a- block” 
person—  both are burdened by the weight of a tangled history that 
nonetheless remains on the move.
Daniel Belgrad, in common with Friedlander, has argued that in order 
to appreciate Olson’s poetry we must approach it as a complete body of 
work, as a total life project. Belgrad champions Olson’s politics by way 
of the sum of activities: “In Olson’s poetic act, the texts of his poems 
must  . . . be seen as inseparable from the little magazines he supported, 
the school he ran, the lectures and readings he gave, and the correspon -
dences he maintained. All these acts contributed to his effort to combat 
the hegemonic sway of corporate capitalist attitudes and of advertise -
ments touting technological progress and white American ethnocen -
trism. His life’s work was a rearguard action against their effort at closure, 
their monopolization of Americans’ attention.”86 Olson’s “chock-  a- block” 
learning—  his theory of Mayan glyphs, for instance—  will often not 
stand up to the scrutiny of specialized scholarship. Robert von Hallberg 
is right to point out that “part of the price he paid for his influence was 
an abiding temptation to achieve literary success as a poet by indulging 
108 Human University
in what he knew to be loose scholarship.”87 Olson’s goal, however, was 
precisely not to be a specialized scholar. In Belgrad’s terms, this would 
have made him a far less effective critic of postwar American society. As 
early as 1973 in the then-  new (and Olson-  inspired) journal boundary 2 , 
Catherine Stimpson sought to counter the misconception that “Olson, 
at his most irritating, is like a computer overloaded with modern 
thought and ancient culture.”88 The sheer quantity of learned allusion 
in Olson’s writing may lead us to the conclusion that such learning is 
idiosyncratic, perhaps even solipsistic. Though there may be some jus -
tice in the charge that Olson’s self-  sacrifice to learning was self-  serving, 
ultimately it was Olson’s aim, achieved in part through his lifelong 
intake of information, to get beyond the “myself ” with which he ends 
his epic.
1094
“ WHEN INFORMATION 
RUBS/AGAINST 
INFORMATION”
POETRY AND INFORMATICS IN THE 
EXPANDED FIELD IN THE 1960S
to wr Ite Poetry today IS to atte MPt to co MMuNIcate over  
a very NoISy cha NNel . . . IN theory It IS PoSSIB le to 
coMMuNIcate eve N over a cha NNel of Nearly u NlIMIted 
NoISe wIth SuItaBle Method S of cod INg      how If the NoISy 
cha NNel IS alSo IN our ow N head.
— David Antin, some/thing
This chapter explores the interplay of poetry and informatics in  
the late 1960s and early 1970s writings of John Cage, Bern Porter, 
Hannah W einer, and Bernadette Mayer. These poets take an informatic 
turn away from the New American and concrete poetry of the 1950s and 
early 1960s toward a poetry increasingly concerned with informatic 
motifs, found materials, and the exhaustive recording of everyday expe -
rience. Other writers and artists who characterize this informatic turn 
in the mid to late 1960s include Vito Acconci, David Antin, Carl Andre, 
Dan Graham, Andy W arhol, Adrian Piper, Lucy Lippard, and the Art 
& Language group. Writing of the turn toward an aesthetic of infor -
mation in the art of the late 1960s, Eve Meltzer argues, “Considered 
together, the aesthetic of ‘information’ and ‘information’ in the techno -
logical sense of the word gave rise to the following notion: the world 
itself had become an information system. And with the exigencies of [the] 
contemporary political scene, the exhibition announced the desperate 
110 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
realisatio n that if the world was a n information system then its subjects 
must be information-  subjects; like the pattern of digital data, all were 
irreversibly alienated from the signified.”1 Informatic themes and proce -
dures in the 1960s have received considerable attention from art histori -
ans; my focus here is on less well-  known poetic texts that are equally 
representative of these concerns. The poets I discuss here may find 
themselves “irreversibly alienated from the signified,” but they also show 
themselves to be keenly interested in representing and mimicking the 
emergent patterns of a society increasingly dominated by information.
The third and final issue of the journal Joglars  (1966), edited by Clark 
Coolidge, contains two significant discussions of the globalization of 
information and communications—  one by John Cage, the other by Stan 
V anDerBeek. Cage’s piece, the first section of “Diary: How to Improve 
the W orld (Y ou Will Only Make Matters W orse),” would reappear in a 
significant location, the Spring 1967 issue of Aspen  magazine, and would 
appear again in an even more significant setting, the Fall 1968 debut 
issue of The Whole Earth Catalog .2 V anDerBeek had known Cage as a 
student at Black Mountain College in the 1950s, and collaborated with 
him on several projects during the 1960s.3 V anDerBeek’s contribution 
to Joglars , “‘Culture: Intercom’ and Expanded Cinema” (versions of which 
were to appear in a number of other contemporaneous journals), intro -
duced the term “expanded cinema.” The term would later be taken for 
the title of Gene Y oungblood’s influential 1970 book, and would take on 
another afterlife with the publication of Rosalind Krauss’s much-  cited 
“Sculpture in the Expanded Field” (subsequently adapted by Barrett 
W atten in his essay “Poetry in the Expanded Field”). As the means of 
print production and distribution are often thematized in this writing, 
it is important to note the technologies—  such as the mimeograph, pho -
tocopier, and Selectric typewriter—  which made much of this writing 
possible. Joglars  is, in many respects, a characteristic journal of the mim -
eograph revolution.4 Co-  edited with Michael Palmer for its first two 
issues, Joglars  was created on an IBM Selectric, then mimeographed (or 
photocopied) and side-  stapled. In format as well as in content, Joglars  
has much in common with the better-  known 0 T o 9 , edited by Berna -
dette Mayer and Vito Acconci, which began a year following the third 
issue of Joglars , and to which Coolidge was a frequent contributor.5
The influence of Marshall McLuhan can be widely felt in the writing 
under discussion here, although other important precursors include Jack -
son Mac Low and Fluxus. Cage often reiterated how central McLuhan 
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  111
was to his later work, going so far as to suggest in 1967 that “not a moment 
passes without my being influenced by him and grateful to him.”6 
McLuhan is quoted on the first page of Cage’s Joglars  contribution, 
while V anDerBeek’s essay–  manifesto is suffused with McLuhanisms. 
McLuhan was himself deeply interested in visual poetry, and his works 
had a special appeal to poets interested in what Dick Higgins (also in 
1966) termed “intermedia.” In 1967, Higgins’s Something Else Press 
would publish McLuhan’s Verbi-  Voco-  Visual Explorations . Something 
Else also published Cage (including the third installment of “Diary” in 
1967) as well as publishing Bern Porter, and in 1966 producing the first 
reprint of Stein’s Making of Americans .
McLuhan’s Verbi-  Voco-  Visual Explorations  raises the issue of infor -
mation overload in relation to its effects on artists and on artistic media, 
and suggests an opposition between “The Artist and the Bureaucrat.” 
But even as McLuhan writes, this distinction seems to break down—  
after the “electronic revolution” we are all, bureaucrats and poets, held 
captive by information, and in particular by television, advertising, and 
newspapers. According to McLuhan, “T oward the end of the last cen -
tury . . . as all kinds of information flowed from many quarters of the 
world in greater volume and at greater speed, so similar varieties of 
knowledge about the inner and outer life of man and society began to 
co- exist even in semi-  literate minds. Biological metaphors of change and 
existence are necessary means of processing and unifying large bodies  
of data.”7
The artist–  hero’s struggle with the bureaucrat–  conformist is a fre -
quent theme in McLuhan’s writings; in “The Artist and the Bureaucrat,” 
McLuhan describes Sherlock Holmes as an artist and suggests that 
much of Holmes’s appeal derives from his struggle with the bureaucracy 
of Scotland Y ard. McLuhan seems to suggest that such artistic and in-  
tellectual resistance is still possible, and yet at the bottom of the page, set 
off from the main text in Futura, is the following factoid: “The Secre -
tariat building of the U.N. is the largest filing cabinet in the world.” “The 
big file,” it would seem, has become increasingly irresistible, and artists 
and writers have little choice but to adapt. As in much of McLuhan’s 
writing, information in abundance is both overwhelming and radically 
liberatory. The key point for McLuhan would seem to be whether art -
ists and intellectuals can use the new information available to them to 
challenge “the ordinary mind devoid of simultaneous modes of aware -
ness or obse rvation.”
112 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
V anDerBeek’s “‘Culture: Intercom’ and Expanded Cinema: A Pro -
posal and Manifesto” takes McLuhan’s rhetoric to greater extremes. It 
begins as follows:
It is imperative that we quickly find some way for the entire level of world 
human understanding to rise to a new human scale.
This scale is the world  . . . 
The risks are the life or death of this world.
The technological explosion of this last half century, and the implied 
future are overwhelming  . . .8
Despite its apocalyptic rhetoric, “Culture: Intercom” is, on the whole, a 
utopian expression of avant-  garde film’s potential to effect radical social 
change. In a manner strikingly reminiscent of the cosmopolitan ambi -
tions of the 1920s avant-  garde before the introduction of sound film, 
V anDerBeek argues that filmmakers must “invent a non-  verbal interna -
tional picture language.” He proposes the creation of “movie-  dromes” or 
“image libraries” as a means by which to “effect the maximum informa -
tion use of the maximum information devices that we now have at our 
disposal.” According to V anDerBeek, “Certain things might happen . . . 
if an individual is exposed to an overwhelming information experience.” 
V anDerBeek is not specific about what these things may be, and his 
manifesto echoes the shock aesthetics of earlier avant-  gardists such as 
Eisenstein and Brecht.
Where V anDerBeek differs from earlier film theorists is in his empha -
sis on the revolutionary effects of the instantaneous global transmission 
of information. His proposal sounds uncannily like a prefiguration of 
the Internet (ARPANET first went into operation in 1969; the term 
“Internet” was adopted in 1974):
By satellite, each [movie-  ]drome could receive its images from a world 
wide library source, store them and program a feedback presentation to the 
local community that lived near the center, this newsreel feedback, could 
authentically review the total world image “reality”  . . . 
“Intra-  Communitronics,” or dialogues with other centers would be 
likely, and instant reference material via transmission television and tele -
phone could be called for and received at 186,000 m.p.s.  . . . from anywhere 
in the world.
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  113
V anDerBeek’s “movie-  drome” draws on a range of technologies and 
media forms—  some new, such as video and satellite communication, 
and others not so new, like the newsreel. V anDerBeek anticipates a cen -
tralized image library connected to a distributed network, although it 
should be noted that his proposal does not specifically mention com -
puters as the central means by which such a network would be facili -
tated. He might have derived his notion of the movie-  drome in part 
from the writings of J. C. R. Licklider, who had, as early as 1960, pro -
posed a global network of “thinking centers” which would “incorporate 
the functions of present-  day libraries together with anticipated advances 
in information storage and retrieval.”9
V anDerBeek was uniquely well positioned in 1966 to survey the rapid 
evolution of new information technologies. From 1964 to 1967, he col -
laborated with Ken Knowlton of Bell Labs to produce some of the ear -
liest computer animation films, a remarkable series of eight films titled 
Poem Field  (Cage would provide the soundtrack for Poem Field  no. 7), 
created on an IBM 7094 mainframe computer. Those films demon -
strate well expanded cinema’s ambitious attempt to fuse word and image 
on- screen. The Poem Field  films also speak to the direct influence of 
Cage and of Olson’s field poetics. As Marjorie Perloff has written in her 
Radical Artifice: Writing Poetry in the Age of Media , “The importance of 
Cage for postmodern poetics cannot be overestimated, for it was Cage 
who understood, at least as early as the fifties, that from now on poetry 
would have to position itself, not vis-  à- vis the landscape or the city or 
this or that political event, but in relation to the media that, like it or 
not, occupy an increasingly large part of our verbal, visual, and acoustic 
space.”10 V anDerBeek’s manifesto is redolent of the language of “the hap -
pening” (Cage staged the first “happening” at Black Mountain in 1952). 
For both Cage and V anDerBeek, by 1966 the “happening” had taken  
on global dimensions; the movie-  drome does not speak to a particular 
place or audience so much as it aspires to address itself to an increas -
ingly globalized (and potentially networked) community of viewers.
How to Worsen the World (You Will Only Make  
Matters Better): John Cage and Information
joaN retallack : Y ou talk very beautifully about “brushing” the source 
text.
114 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
johN cage: Y es. That term comes from Marshall McLuhan, you know, 
“brushing information against information.” And that this is our only 
work now. Do you know that? Y es, work is obsolete. All we do is brush 
information against information.11
Nearly twenty-  five years after writing the first installment of “Diary: 
How to Improve the W orld,” Cage once again evoked the McLuhan 
quote from The Medium Is the Massage.  His response speaks forcefully 
to the increasingly informational character of the global economy. The 
phrase “When information is brushed against information” first appeared 
in McLuhan’s 1963 essay “The Agenbite of Outwit” in a strikingly pro -
phetic passage: “Man in the electronic age has no possible environment 
except the globe and no possible occupation except information gather -
ing. By simply moving information and brushing information against 
information, any medium whatever creates vast wealth. The richest cor -
poration in the world—  Atlantic T elephone and T elegraph—  has only 
one function: moving information about.”12 Nearly the same phrase 
adorns the Quentin Fiore designed poster of “Diary” that appeared in 
the fourth issue of Aspen , except that “When information is brushed 
against information” is instead “When information rubs / against infor -
mation.” In The Medium Is the Massage  the quote is juxtaposed with a 
close-  up of a woman’s legs clad in fishnet stockings. On the following 
page, the sentence continues: “The results are startling and effective. The 
perennial quest for involvement, fill-  in, takes many forms.”13 Including, 
apparently, the form of involvement with women’s bodies, since the 
turn-  of- the- page accompanying image is of a model wearing a “ love ” 
dress.
W e might dismiss this sequence out of hand merely as crude 1960s 
objectification (which it is), were it not that McLuhan, as early as the 
1951 Mechanical Bride , was critical of the ways in which advertising  
represented the female body. Writing of an ad for woman’s nylons, he 
claims, “T o the mind of the modern girl, legs, like busts, are power 
points which she has been taught to tailor, but as parts of the success  
kit rather than erotically or sensuously. She swings her legs from the  
hip with masculine drive and confidence. She knows that ‘a long-  legged 
gal can go places.’ As such, her legs are not intimately associated with 
her unique self but are merely display objects like the grill work on a  
car. They are date-  baited power levers for the management of the male 
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  115
audience.”14 McLuhan’s rhetoric is fraught and implicitly sexist, but he 
does raise several important considerations, which are articulated more 
fully in Understanding Media  and The Medium Is the Massage . For 
McLuhan, the most exaggerated aspects of femininity are closely tied to 
reversing masculine power, and to controlling a flow of information: 
rather than information being immaterial or transcending culture, for 
McLuhan information is closely tied to advertising and to social roles. 
For the McLuhan of 1951, the objectification of the female body is anal -
ogous to the “grill work on a car.” By 1967, the register is not the indus -
trial excesses of automobile design, but rather the informatic patterns  
of the global media system. The stocking-  clad legs of the woman are,  
we might say, overdetermined, signifying a range of social relations and 
symbolic exchanges between men and women.15
Cage’s “Diary” is a uniquely hybrid work; its nearest formal analog 
might be Cage’s lectures or mesostic poems, but it departs significantly 
from those models. For the most part “Diary” consists of quotations, 
but it also contains original writing. Although its title suggests that it is 
a chronological life record, it is constructed more like a constrained 
commonplace book than a conventional diary. Published in ten sections 
(spread across three books) between 1967 and 1982, the “Diary” would 
ultimately be recorded in its entirety by Cage shortly before his death. 
The “Diary” is, to my mind, a significant work deserving of greater crit -
ical attention. Here, I restrict myself to the opening section. Importantly, 
Cage drew attention to the mediated nature of the text from the begin -
ning: the Joglars  version is written in twelve different typefaces on a 
Selectric typewriter; the Aspen  version adds color to those fonts. Com -
posing the text on a Selectric must have been a laborious undertaking, 
since each change of font would have required swapping out the famous 
golf-  ball-  shaped type head. Cage claimed in the headnote to the Ye a r  
from Monday  version that the choice of typeface as well as margins was 
determined by chance operations. Each line was to have fewer than 
forty-  three characters (coincidentally or not, the Selectric type ball fea -
tured forty-  four characters).
The “Diary” is a utopian text, immediately proposing “getting rid of 
ownership” and the “disappearance of power politics” in its opening lines. 
It is also a work centrally concerned with the acquisition and dissemi -
nation of information. A number of Cage’s lectures feature him in pur -
suit of autodidactic knowledge. This quest for knowledge often takes 
116 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
the form of telephone calls to libraries, as in “Lecture on the W eather” 
or, on a smaller scale, in the “Mushroom Haiku.” On its first page, the 
“Diary” incorporates one such motif of information gathering. Cage 
describes a transformative experience in 1964 (which elsewhere he sug -
gests led him to begin the diary)16 that impressed on him the need to 
think globally:
April ’64: U.S.
State Department man gave Honolulu
talk—  “global village whether we
like it or not”—  cited fifty-  five
services which are global in extent.17
A year and a half later, Cage attempts to track down the fifty-  five ser -
vices, only to find:
When I
Said, “Fifty-  five global services,”
California Bell T elephone man replied
(September ’65), “It’s now sixty-  one.”18
Cage has in effect witnessed the rapid growth of electronic bureaucracy. 
No one seems to know what the specific nature of the “global services” 
are, and yet everyone seems confident that they exist. Cage continues 
the motif, and implies that an unspecified interlocutor is giving him 
advice about how to find the information he is seeking:
“Write to Center for the Study
of Democratic Institutions: they’ll
know about the global services.”
did. They answered they knew nothing,
suggested writing to State Department.
Books one formerly needed were hard to
locate. Now they’re all out in
paperback. Society’s changing.
Relevant information’s hard to come
by. Soon it’ll be everywhere, unnoticed.19
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  117
In effect, Cage is tracking an epochal shift from information scarcity to 
information abundance. Cage draws heavily on the paradoxical rhetoric 
of McLuhan and Fuller—  but by means of the constrained nature of 
“Diary,” he also manages to maintain something of a deadpan distanc -
ing from their more direct pronouncements. Cage seems to suggest that 
despite the unprecedented impact of new communications technolo -
gies, not much has changed in terms of our ability to access “relevant 
information.” T o a self-  identified anarchist such as Cage, the uncon -
trolled growth of mysterious governmental institutions ought to be im-  
plicitly anathema. Ever the optimist, however, Cage was to remark in the 
same late interview from which my epigraph is taken, “Life is abundant. 
People are polyattentive.”20 Cage was too sophisticated to attribute his 
artistic practices exclusively to changing media and communications sys -
tems. His music, art, and writing could well be described as polymedi -
atic. As the subtitle to Brandon Joseph’s Beyond the Dream Syndicate: 
T ony Conrad and the Arts After Cage  indicates, Cage exerted an extraor -
dinary influence over later artists and writers working across multiple 
media. Thanks in part to Cage, as the sixties progressed information 
practices and motifs would play an increasingly prominent role in poetic 
(and visual poetic) writing. In Silence , Cage writes:
If we set out to catalogue things
.
.
.
today, we find ourselves rather
.
.
.
endlessly involved in cross-  
.
.
.
referencing.21
Information rubbing against information, to push the metaphor fur -
ther, could be construed as analogous to cultural cross-  referencing. And 
information rubbing against itself could now serve as a metaphor not 
118 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
only for advertising and t elecommunication, but also for artistic and 
poetic creation.
“‘Info’ Man, Are You There?”: Bern Porter’s Founds  
and the Culture of Information
Bern Porter is the only postwar American poet to have merited a retro -
spective at the Museum of Modern Art. An eccentric who could perhaps 
be classified as an “outsider” artist, Porter is best known for his “founds,” 
or found visual poems. He was a physicist by training, but he was also 
an artist, writer, publisher, and polymath. He worked on the Manhattan 
Project and on the Saturn V rocket. He met and worked with Albert 
Einstein, J. Robert Oppenheimer, and W ernher von Braun. He never 
owned a car or a television. Though he lived without many modern 
conveniences, he also polemicized starkly, “Obsolescence revolts me.”22 
Porter was deeply conflicted about the effects of technology, but he was 
also committed to using applied science to expand the realms of art and 
poetry. According to his biographer James Schevill, Porter was centrally 
“concerned with revealing how science and technology can combine with 
art and poetry to show us a world so loaded with new information that 
it is almost impossible to catalog it completely.”23 The books of found 
poems that Porter created in the 1960s took as their material all manner 
of textual and visual material—  from advertisements to computer print -
outs from the Saturn V rocket project. So eclectic are Porter’s materials 
that it is difficult to trace the origins of many of his appropriations. The 
founds, which are deeply skeptical of American consumerism and mass 
culture, also parody an increasingly informatic, bureaucratized society.
Porter echoes William Blake in his call for a liberation of the senses 
by means of visual poetry. Porter considered radio, tape recording, and 
film all to hold considerable potential for poetic innovation. In 1959, he 
called for a “scipoe” in which
Physics projects poetry beyond the typographical entrapment  
traditionally circumscribing it as a visually read experience.
Physics provides a method, principle, terminology, spirit and advance to 
be incorporated into poetics for enrichment and extension.
Enhancement is further possible with electronic recording in the pure 
word state by microphone, tape, record and loudspeaker for  
transmission by ear.24
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  119
By 1975, Porter was describing this co-  relation between energy and lan -
guage in terms of “data bits,” and continuing to insist on the possibility 
of overcoming the limitations of the five senses: “The pulsating, expand -
ing, contracting vibrant energy plasma which I call intelligence, sends, 
receives, assimilates, manages and controls energy data bits within the 
confines of a present five-  sense system.”25
Porter’s books of found poems tend to be sparing in their manner of 
collaging together materials. By contrast to the tradition of Dada photo -
montage or even of early pop art collage (such as the work of Richard 
Hamilton), Porter tended to use only one, or at most several, sources 
per page. Porter composed his founds on the scale of the book as well  
as on the scale of the page (or page spread), and each book typically 
constrains itself to a sequence of texts and images on a given theme. 
Porter’s 468B: Thy Future  (Figure 10) is the most austerely informatic of 
Porter’s books; the entirety of it consists of appropriated computer 
code. It is almost impossible to read in a conventional manner; 468B: 
Thy Future  contains no deliberately constructed sentences in human 
language. The human future, it would seem, is opaquely numbered and 
coded—  468B  is a transmission from inside the military–  industrial–  
space complex that seemingly has no addressee.
Figure 10.  Bern Porter, from 468B: Thy Future .
120 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
The W astemaker, 1926–  1961, Porter’s first major book of founds, pres -
ents a fascinating cross-  section of recycled texts and images, many of 
them presumably found in the trash at his local post office. As its title 
suggests, The W astemaker  recycles the detritus of consumer news and 
information. Like the print advertising that had come of age by the 1920s, 
The W astemaker  is detached from any sense of individuated, localizable 
meaning. Lists, formulae, and charts appear seemingly at random. Fig -
ure 11 shows a characteristic juxtaposition; on the left page, what seems 
to be a portion of an ad asks the question “‘Info’ Man, Are Y ou There?” 
On the right hand page is a Greek inscription taken from H. Rider 
Haggard’s popular novel She. “‘Info’ Man” would seem to harbor a litany 
of physical disorders associated with information anxiety: from the ex-  
pected (headache and eyestrain) to the not so expected (hemorrhoids). 
“‘Info’ Man” gives no answer to the question posed to him; presumably 
he is too busy dealing with the maladies induced in him by information 
overload. Porter’s later Book of Dos  (1982) also contains a suggestive found 
advertisement (Figure 12). Like many of Porter’s appropriations, the ad 
takes the form of an imperative statement: we are ordered to “Beat the 
Data Explosion,” but in the absence of specifics, the free-  floating ad can 
Figure 11.  Bern Porter, from The W astemaker .
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  121
seemingly only contribute to the data glut. The ad seems to suggest that 
whatever product or service it aims to sell can help us overcome a ten -
dency to “view the world as a battleground.” At the same time, the ad 
seems to traffic in a corporate survival-  of- the- fittest rhetoric: we must 
master information or information will master us.
Porter’s books—  and in particular works such as 468B: Thy Future  and 
The Manhattan T elephone Book — often explore themes of remediation, 
to the extent that the books themselves function as long meditations on 
the disconnection of words and images from everyday experience. Each 
of Porter’s found books in effect presents a cross-  section of the com -
mercial graphic design of a specific era. The founds reconstitute a world 
of lost ephemera to the extent that his biographer claims, “In the end, 
Porter himself becomes a Found.”26 In common with Hannah W einer, 
Porter often imagines himself not as a source of poetic writing, but 
rather as a perceiving body within (and sometimes upon) which writing 
is received and processed (or left as unprocessed data). Porter’s found 
books are scrapbooks of their time, but they are also explorations of a 
world in which there are too many messages for us to be able to identify 
the senders and the recipients of those messages.
Figure 12.  Bern Porter, from The Book of Dos .
122 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
Resisting Technicized Memory: Bernadette Mayer from 
Memory  to Studying Hunger
Before being publis hed in a book version, Bernadette Mayer’s Memory  
took the form of a multimedia installation of 1,200 color snapshots 
accompanied by a 7.5-  hour tape recording of roughly 200 pages of text 
written during the month of July, 1971. In moving from Memory  to her 
next project, Studying Hunger , Mayer describes a shift in her writing: 
“Y ou see, the whole thing [ Studying Hunger ] had already had a beginning 
with a project called MeMory which turned into a show which turned 
into a dream or returned to a dream that enabled me to walk. Before 
this I couldnt walk, I had street fantasies like any normal prostitute.”27 
Like Andy W arhol’s 1968 a, A Novel  or Kenneth Goldsmith’s 1995 Solilo -
quy, Mayer’s Memory  is a “project of attention,” a constrained record of 
a span of time. And like those projects, Memory  suggests a voyeuristic 
engagement with intimate details of daily life. In describing Memory  as 
a “project of attention,” I am drawing on the work of Michael Shering -
ham and Andrew Epstein. Projects of attention typically involve the 
recording of everyday experience over specific periods of time. Shering -
ham describes a project as a “commitment to midterm actions—  implies 
a preoccupation with the domain of practice.”28 Georges Perec’s “ Attempt 
to Exhaust a Place in Paris,” which took place over three days, is an 
exemplary “project of attention.” Sheringham also cites the examples  
of Henri Lefebvre, Raymond Queneau, and the Situationists. Epstein 
applies the term to Ron Silliman’s BART , in which Silliman describes 
the experience of 5.5 hours spent traveling to every station on the Bay 
Area Rapid Transit system. A number of works by authors under dis -
cussion in this book could be described as projects of attention: Cage’s 
Diary , Goldsmith’s Soliloquy , Lin’s ambient and index poetics. Mayer’s 
Memory , by the standards of projects of attention, is extremely involved 
and seemingly unconstrained. Memory  and Studying Hunger  could also 
be described as “projects of distraction”; by way of a proliferation of 
fragmentary memory they point to the variability of attention and to 
the irreducible richness of sensory experience.
Both Memory  and Studying Hunger  are sprawling works that contain 
multiple references to coding and to data accumulation. Whereas Mem -
ory was in effect a multimedia project that depended on audio record-  
ing and photography, Studying Hunger  confines itself to text. Mayer’s 
descrip  tion of her practice deservers to be quoted at length:
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  123
I had an idea before this that if a human, a writer, could come up with a 
workable code, or shorthand, for the transcription of every event, every 
motion, every transition of his or her own mind, & could perform this pro -
cess of translation on himself, using the code, for a 24-  hour period, he or 
we or someone could come up with a great piece of language/information.
Anyway
When I began to attempt the month-  long experiment with states of 
consciousness, I wrote down a list of intentions. It went like this: First,  
to record special states of consciousness. Special: change, sudden change, 
high, low, food, levels of attention.29
The title Studying Hunger  refers not so much to the bohemian artist’s 
starved existence as it does to Mayer’s attempt to record as many of the 
ambient details (and desires) of everyday life as possible—  without, I 
would suggest, allowing those details, alone or in the aggregate, to define 
her. The motif of hunger becomes a kind of catchall metaphor for desire 
and for the memory of desire. Ostensibly, Studying Hunger  is a life record 
provided by Mayer to her psychoanalyst. It is, however, a record so ex-  
haustively detailed that it is difficult to see how it could be of much 
therapeutic value to the analyst.
From its opening, Studying Hunger  announces its intention “to do the 
opposite of ‘accumulate data,’ oppose MeMorIeS, dIarIeS, find struc -
tures.”30 Rather, Mayer seeks
a language  . . . that stays on the observation/notes/leaps side of language 
border which seems to separate, just barely, observation & analysis. But if the 
language must resort to analysis to “keep going,” then let it be closer to that 
than to “accumulate data.” Keep going is a pose; accumulate data is a pose.
Also, to use this to find a structure for MeMory & you, you will find out 
what memory is, you already know, what moving is
And, to do this without remembering31
Mayer’s challenge is not unlike the one described by Stein in “Composi -
tion as Explanation” and “What Are Masterpieces”: how to reconfigure 
memory so as to be able to think “without remembering”—  that is, to 
reveal underlying structures of memory so as to resist static patterns of 
recollection. T o do the opposite of accumulating data, it is paradoxically 
124 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
necessary for Mayer to obsessively record states of consciousness—  not 
to seek “a great piece of language,” but rather to find new ways of absorb -
ing, encoding, and perhaps even erasing recorded data.
If both Memory  and Studying Hunger  are confessional in nature, they 
do not seem to be primarily about guilt, but rather a cathartic engage -
ment with “language/information.” Mayer’s prose is alternately laconic 
and opinionated, and her punctuation is deliberately haphazard. In 
pass ing, she discusses with an unspecified interlocutor the pressures of 
the mass media:
How much information is contained in it for individual message nut-  
quality needs, if you now know what I mean. Incorporation of the lost 
object—  ingestion as introjection, or, an injection of milk as sense of 
humor. And then as the ego rejoins the id in sound sleep. In the previous 
(above) story, try to distinguish signal from noise. Thank you very much. 
Is this elation-  writing? Is this a woman writing? Is this person a woman?  
Is this woman elated? Is this a woman’s elation? The hunger situation is  
the deepest point of fixation in the depressions, a model for the later, and 
famous: “threatened loss of love.”32
Mayer’s digressive headlong style parodies a reductive Freudianism. 
The floating sentence “Thank you very much” would seem to pay hom -
age to Stein. Each “introjection” in the paragraph could be analogous to 
a lost object that cannot be reclaimed. The series of questions Mayer 
poses about elation and women’s writing would seem to be unanswer -
able: the writer’s psychic states cannot be reduced to any single message. 
Linda Russo writes that “ Memory  retrieves history-  making for the col -
lective from  the individual.”33 By obsessively recording the omnipresent 
mundaneness of desire, Memory  and Studying Hunger  prevent us from 
becoming fixated on Mayer herself—  in effect, the accumulation of data 
continually redirects the reader away from depth psychology. While she 
was at work on Studying Hunger , Mayer was also at work on her exten -
sive collaboration with Clark Coolidge, The Cave  (1972–  78). Coolidge 
has said of this period, “W e were all interested in writing a thousand 
pages a day”;34 “W e wanted endless works, that would zoom on & on 
and include everything ultimately, we’d talk about the ‘Everything work’ 
which would use every possible bit flashing through our minds.”35 Much 
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  125
of what Mayer and Coolidge wrote (together and separately) during  
the early 1970s went unpublished or did not appear in book form.  
Both writers were prolific, but they also edited carefully and published 
selectively. The original Studying Hunger  (1975) was only seventy pages 
long; the complete Studying Hunger Journals  cover more than 450 pages. 
Comparing the two versions reveals that Mayer rewrote the raw journal 
material extensively.
Both versions of Studying Hunger  are more anti-  confessional than 
con fessional; both overwhelm with detail and with indeterminate states 
of consciousness. It can be difficult to tell whether the author is awake 
or dreaming, and everyday banalities can quickly slide into surreal exag -
geration. Studying Hunger  echoes Gene Y oungblood’s 1970 declaration 
in Expanded Cinema  that “the accumulation of facts is no longer of top 
priority to humanity.”36 Mayer’s 1977 book Eruditio Ex Memoria  would 
continue to pursue questions of lived, personal memory and its relation 
to recorded, stored memory.37 Essentially a compendium of factoids re-  
membered from throughout her education, Eruditio  offers a skeptical 
take on rote memory. “I know all this information is wrong because it 
was taught to me by Catholics,” she observes.38 Like its predecessors 
Memory  and Studying Hunger , Eruditio  thematizes the difficulty of giving 
significance to the author’s abundant memories. Speaking to an imag -
ined reader, Mayer writes, “I expect something and I think you know 
exactly where I am and what I’m doing and it might not be so. I have a 
memory and a backlog of knowledge and information that is not neces -
sarily complete for you.”39 Both poet and reader are lost in the backlog—   
it is difficult for Mayer to know what her reader does and does not know 
about her. In a particularly Steinian sentence from Memory , she writes, 
“There are no secrets here, there’s a part of my memory’s a picture show 
& then I think what do I do next: next to memory running with mem -
ory motion information & design design a motion design forward motion 
design style let me save you the trouble, let me repeat: I could design 
style conceals, let me add simply add & you accumulate cause you come 
close like the dreams & pictures all over the walls & floor.”40 Here again 
would seem to be the tension between “keep going is a pose” and “accu -
mulating data is a pose.” Since everything is a pose, however, there is 
also nothing that needs to be concealed. Accumulation becomes a kind 
of antistyle that refuses to keep secrets. A s in Poe’s “Purloined Letter,” 
126 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
the safest place to conceal something may be in plain view, especially if 
the view is crowded. In one of Studying Hunger ’s more paranoid moments, 
Mayer muses as to whether “the police, with special photographic tech -
niques, would decipher something from this writing if I commit a homi -
cide.”41 What would save her from detection, she concludes, would be 
the sheer quantity of information she has left behind: “But how would 
they know that it was this page, out of all the hundreds of pages of  
writing, this page that was to be studied at the lab.”42 By making public 
so great a quantity of memories, Mayer refuses to privilege one kind of 
memory (personal/expressive) over another (public/restrained).
Externalized or technicized memory, particularly in the context of 
poetry, has been a concern within W estern philosophy at least since 
Plato’s Ion and Phaedrus . This concern seems to have gained new rele -
vance in the 1960s with the rise of McLuhan and the publication of 
works such as Jacques Derrida’s 1966 Of Grammatology.  Mayer’s memory 
projects do not directly theorize their relation to new technologies of 
recording—  but it can hardly be a coincidence that Mayer rebels against 
“accumulating data” at a time, the late 1960s and early 1970s, when por -
table technologies (such as those used in the Memory  exhibition) made 
it possible to record one’s own life in ever more exhausting detail. The 
most famous instance of involuntary memory in twentieth-  century lit -
erature is the petit madeleine episode in Swann’s Way ; the sheer volume 
of Mayer’s memories makes it impossible to place so much significance 
in any single object or phenomenon. Nor does Mayer place much confi -
dence in the totality of personal memory. Like Joe Brainard’s nearly con -
temporaneous I Remember  (the first installment of which was published 
by Angel Hair in 1970), Mayer’s memory projects refuse strict chronol -
ogy, just as they refuse to assign hierarchical importance to individual 
memories. Both writer and reader cannot help but be overwhelmed by 
detail. Paradoxically, the abundance of recollection returns us not to the 
past, but rather to the continuous present.
Words I See: Clairvoyance and Informatics  
in the Poetry of Hannah Weiner
Hannah W einer’s remarkable “Trans-  Space Communication” immedi -
ately follows a series of visual poems by Bern Porter in the July 1969 
sixth issue of 0 T o 9.  In her most important poetic statement before she 
 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”  127
began to write clairvoyantly, W einer describes her interest in “exploring 
methods of communication that will be understood face to face, or at 
any distance, regardless of country or planet or origin.”43 Alluding to 
her recent code poem performances, she recounts that her “explorations 
have dealt with the use of minimal clues: how much information can be 
received, and how accurately, through how little means.”44 W einer then 
goes on to directly situate her writing in the context of information 
overload:
The amount of information available has more than doubled since W orld 
W ar II. In the next ten years it will double again. How do we deal with it?
 1. Do we use more than the 5% of the brain we now use?
 2. Do we process quicker?
 3.  Do we decode information more and put it in another form (not 
  language) so that the present brain can handle it?
 4. Is there a change in the neural circuits of the brain?45
W einer’s subsequent writing, in effect, attempted to answer all four of 
these questions in the affirmative. By its incorporation of multiple voices, 
her clairvoyant writing is able to reveal, as well as to overcome, the limi -
tations of the single brain working in isolation.
W einer’s clairvoyant practice is too complex for me to detail adequately 
here, but I would align myself with Judith Goldman, Patrick Durgin, 
and Joyelle McSweeney in suggesting that we not conflate W einer’s clair -
voyance “with either illness or a supernatural gift of fortune-  telling.”46 
As Linda Russo writes, “W einer’s clairvoyant writing reveals the female 
subject to be a surface available for the projection of (often conflicting) 
aural and visual texts.”47 Like Porter, W einer routinely recorded impera -
tive commands; those commands point to a collective group mind, which 
is both empathetic and troubling, as much as they are targeted to indi -
viduals and/or to W einer herself. “Living with these words is like living 
under orders,” she writes in the preface to Clairvoyant Journal .48 Those 
orders come at rapid-  fire speed. One of the most striking aspects of  
the audio recordings of Clairvoyant Journal  is the fast pace at which 
W einer and her fellow performers read.49 “The four years of this manu -
script,” she continues, “document my experience and changes in percep -
tion. I continue writing as a collaborator with word S I See. Sometimes 
I struggle as I don’t eNjoy all their interruptions.”50 W einer’s syntax here 
128 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
even suggests that “ word S I See” is a kind of person—  as with so much 
in W einer’s clairvoyant writing, it raises fascinating questions with regard 
to private and public voices, and the nature of poetic inspiration.
Mayer and Wiener were close friends and mutual influences during 
this period, and the first page of Clairvoyant Journal  (Figure 13) invokes 
Mayer’s example. Wiener describes Mayer as an important precursor in 
“doing pre thought thinking.” The disjointed syntax of W einer’s text 
shows her exchanging thoughts and voices with her clairvoyant inter -
locutors (one of whom is represented by capital letters, the other by ital -
ics): “Bernadette’s Mayer ex PerIMeNtS this book is mind controlled 
the walk  Bernadette  language ex communicate her words so through  it 
goes through The way I quote  to destroy a word is to change its lit-
ters.”51 W einer’s interlocutor could here even be referring to the walk of 
the prostitute described in Studying Hunger . Presumably the “mind con -
trolled” book W einer refers to is her Clairvoyant Journal , but this could 
also refer to Mayer’s books (it is the second voice that specifies “ Mayer 
exPerIMeNtS,” not W einer herself ). Fascinatingly, it is not Wiener 
alone who makes the statement “The way I quote  to destroy a word.” 
Rather, “ I quote ” is a clairvoyant statement, a quotation that may have 
been received visually, aurally, or even telepathically. The very ambiguity 
of the reception/transmission of the statement would seem to remove 
it from the category of verifiable knowledge. In effect, to take W einer “at 
her word” is to acknowledge the profoundly social nature of language, 
which can of course take many forms other than direct utterance. By  
“ex communicating” language, W einer seems to suggest, Mayer makes 
visible underlying structures of memory and feeling that cannot other -
wise be expressed.
W einer frequently thematizes her own inability to record accurately 
and completely the clairvoyant messages she sees and hears. She both 
welcomes and resents “when all these interruptions keep arriving.”52 Her 
use of informatic motifs would culminate in her The Zero One  (1985), 
whose title surely must refer to the binary basis of computer languages. 
Largely composed of anecdotes regarding the case of Leonard Peltier 
and the struggles of the American Indian Movement,  The Zero One  is 
an entropic text that progressively dissolves into seemingly random num -
bers. The anecdotes or fragments that W einer records are continually 
interrupted by number sequences, as in the poem’s opening: “There are 
other ways to write 01234  . . .”53 As the poem goes on, it increasingly 
Figure 13.  Hannah Wiener, from Clairvoyant Journal , 2/28. By permission of 
Charles Bernstein in trust for Hannah W einer.
Figure 14.  From Hannah Wiener, Written In/The Zero One . By permission of 
Charles Bernstein in trust for Hannah W einer.

Figure 15.  Hannah Wiener, from Clairvoyant Journal , 3/10. By permission of 
Charles Bernstein in trust for Hannah W einer.
132 “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
resembles a garbled transmission, until at the poem’s end (Figure 14), 
the text has become as much as half made up of numbers, and the poem 
has become divided into seven columns of five characters each. Seem -
ingly direct political and metapoetic statements are interrupted and 
over  written, creating fascinating juxtapositions: “Poetr funct is012 to012 
rekin langu to012  . . .” or “Offic verse cultu is012 more0 / Inten death 
squad attac and01 kidna of012 / Y ou01 can01 quote me012  . . .”54 Although 
W einer, or perhaps an interlocutor, gives us permission to quote her 
here, the very construction of The Zero One  makes it almost impossi-  
ble to quote in discrete units. Like the writings of Cage, Porter, and 
Mayer from this period, W einer’s poetry cultivates an overdetermined 
aesthetic. The March 10 entry of the journal (Figure 15), for instance, 
features “ couNtdow N” as a repeated word. Although the writing pur -
ports to write itself, this happens only with great difficulty, as evidenced 
by the diagonal positioning of the text “ It wr IteS ItSelf,” juxtaposed 
with “ caN’t get the SPacINg / it’s a nice arc.”55
In Clairvoyant Journal , voices take on a mediated and overlapping 
interdependence. The most famous deleted words of modernist poetry 
are Eliot’s “ he do the PolIce IN dIffere Nt vo IceS” from the type -
script of The W aste Land , crossed out by Pound and returned through 
the mail. W einer’s voice is continually interrupted by different voices, 
but just as often she interrupts the voices she hears, ignoring the demand 
that she “ Shut u P.” W einer’s writing is both polyphonic and abrasively 
dissonant. W einer—  again in common with Cage, Porter, and Mayer—  
describes the experience of being inundated with information in all its 
forms. This is a source of great concern—  it is also a source of an ambi -
tious poetics that attempts to envision new forms of communication 
and information sharing.
1335
PARADISE AND 
INFORMATICS
LYN HEJINIAN, BRUCE ANDREWS, AND 
THE POSTHUMAN ADAMIC
Form does not necessarily achieve closure, nor does raw materiality 
provide openness. Indeed, the conjunction of form with radical openness 
may be what can offer a version of the “paradise” for which writing often 
yearns—  a flowering focus on a distant infinity.
— Lyn Hejinian, “The Rejection of Closure”
Artist never fell.
— Robert Grenier, “T ender Buttons”
Paradise figures prominently as a motif in the work of a number of 
Language writers—  especially during the early to mid-  1980s in the 
writing of Lyn Hejinian, Ron Silliman, and and Bruce Andrews—  and to 
a lesser extent also in the writing of Bob Perelman, Charles Bernstein, 
and Jean Day.1 Bob Perelman demonstrates succinctly the many political 
levels on which the metaphor could operate in his 1988 Captive Audience :
But do we at least agree
that the human body is paradise
and that the United States
of America is not?2
Or as Bruce Andrews deploys the conceit with implications that are no 
less sweeping: “Paradise is a total repertoire of possibilities.”3
134 Paradise and Informatics
T o oversimplify at the outset, I make the case here that the conflict -
ing notions of paradise deployed in 1980s Language writing respond to 
three revolutions (or so-  called revolutions): the sexual revolution, the 
Reagan revolution, and the information revolution. Although these are 
of course very different kinds of “revolutions,” in a generalized sense all 
three could be said to be aftereffects of cultural changes that began in the 
1960s. Of these three related yet distinct revolutions, it is the nascent in-  
formation revolution on which I focus primarily here—  and in particular 
on Hejinian’s and Andrews’s attempts to resist what Donna Haraway 
was to characterize in 1985 as the “informatics of domination.”4
The recent publication of the ten-  volume Grand Piano: An Experi -
ment in Collective Autobiography  has greatly expanded our knowledge of 
the San Francisco Language writing scene in the late 1970s. T ed Pearson 
describes San Francisco at the time as “hardly paradise, but it was the 
city in which we arrived, through which we flowed, and from which we 
dispersed .”5 The effects of the sexual revolution (the designation is prob -
lematically general) can be felt throughout The Grand Piano , from Steve 
Benson’s description of coming out amid the “Gay Revolution”6 to Ron 
Silliman’s suggestion, “ As for sex in my poetry—  it sometimes seems to 
me that it’s everywhere.”7 In volume 6, the theme of which is “the body,” 
Kit Robinson describes a play called Paradise Now  at the Living Theater 
in New Haven in 1969. His account stands in well as a microcosm of the 
success and failure of late-  1960s liberationist ideals. The play “began 
with the players roaming the aisles and shouting slogans (‘I can’t travel 
without a passport’) (‘I’m not allowed to smoke marijuana’) and ended 
with audience members in various stages of undress cavorting with the 
players, by now naked, on stage.”8 Such a paradise was profoundly gener -
ative for artists and writers, but it did not last. The pre-  AIDS San Fran -
cisco of The Grand Piano  might be described as a comparative paradise 
in terms of its sexual mores. But by the mid-  1980s, with the arrival of 
AIDS, the Reagan presidency, and the 1986 Bowers v. Hardwick  Supreme 
Court decision, that paradise had been lost. From Hejinian’s perspec -
tive, “Within a few months of Reagan’s taking office, a half century of 
social progress was on the way out.”9 In The Grand Piano , Hejinian 
describes the end of the kind of 1960s idealism described by Robinson: 
“While the 60s may have foreseen the ending of the Cold W ar, they also 
mark the point from which global capitalism as we know it began its 
momentous surge.  . . . Left political counterculture was bent on bringing 
 Paradise and Informatics  135
alternative practices into the American sociopolitical experience. But 
corporate America soon discovered the means to coopt, commercialize, 
and mainstream the signifiers and signifying systems of the counter -
culture, banalizing its most visible forms of self-  representation.”10 The 
basic outlines of the 1960s as a lost paradise persist in popular accounts 
of the period. This narrative has been challenged by, among others, 
Thomas Frank, who in his Conquest of Cool  argues that corporate cul -
ture was in fact deeply involved in the creation of the counterculture 
from the late 1950s onward.11 Like Frank, Hejinian is careful to note that 
the sixties were not only host to a liberatory populism, but also witness 
to an intensified American consumerism.
With respect to consumerism and sexuality, the writing of the Lan -
guage writers strongly bears witness to the post-  1960s changes described 
by Joel Dinerstein: “In a sense the Enlightenment utopia of the mind—   
as the rational host of self-  control, self-  mastery, and perfectibility—  has 
shifted to the body. As self-  actualization now seems possible through 
technological advance, the body has become the locus of consumer desire 
and the (literal) base for layers of technological prosthetics.  . . . As late 
as the 1970s, the utopian ideals of technological transformation tended 
more toward the national (transportation networks, nuclear energy, 
NASA) and even the domestic (consumer appliances, television) than 
the personal.”12 Dinerstein’s account maps well on to the challenges faced 
by left-  leaning writers in the wake of the 1960s. The pursuit of paradise, 
to adapt Dinerstein’s narrative slightly, shifted after the 1960s from a 
collective undertaking to a personal one. Dinerstein names the individu -
alist pursuit of body-  centered perfection the “posthuman Adamic,” and 
suggests that “the concept of the Adamic is invested in recuperating an 
Edenic purity earned through virtuous work.”13 Increasingly supplement -
ing the body’s capacity for work in the postwar period, personal and 
prosthetic technologies promoted a happiness to be found through 
physical and technological perfectionism. As Dinerstein writes of the 
paradise of personal technologies, “Since the early 1980s, the consumer 
fruits of the electronic and computer revolutions have stirred every 
younger generation to a faith in the peaceful, plentiful, groovy future 
made possible by technological fables of abundance.”14 In diagnosing 
what is wrong with this scenario, Dinerstein argues that “posthuman 
escapism is based in the fear of understanding the human organism as 
a multiethnic, multicultural, multigenetic construction created through 
136 Paradise and Informatics
centuries of contact and acculturation  . . . In other words, the posthuman 
is an escape from the panhuman. ”15
The critique of the “posthuman Adamic” takes perhaps its strongest 
form in Donna Haraway’s 1985 “Cyborg Manifesto.” Acknowledging her 
debt to Haraway’s term “the informatics of domination,” N. Katherine 
Hayles defines “informatics” as “technologies of information as well as 
the biological, social, linguistic, and cultural changes that initiate, accom -
pany, and complicate their development.”16 Haraway rejects outright any 
kind of equation of informatic technology with a paradisal future or a 
paradisal past: “ A cyborg body is not innocent; it was not born in a gar -
den; it does not seek unitary identity and so generate antagonistic dual -
isms without end (or until the world ends); it takes irony for granted. 
One is too few, and two is only one possibility. Intense pleasure in skill, 
machine skill, ceases to be a sin, but an aspect of our embodiment. W e 
can be responsible for machines; they do not dominate or threaten us.”17 
The figure of the posthuman Adam—  Dinerstein offers the examples of 
the 1984 film The T erminator  and the 1986 film RoboCop — has typically 
taken the form of a white male whose innate powers are supplemented 
by technological means. Haraway’s cyborg attacks such ideological cre -
ations by way of a technophilic irony, but Haraway is careful to reject 
technological determinism. Above all, she insists, “cyborg writing must 
not be about the Fall, the imagination of a once-  upon-  a- time wholeness 
before language, before writing, before Man.”18 Though the Language 
writers were influenced by, and sympathetic to, Haraway’s project (vol -
ume 5 of The Grand Piano  begins with an epigraph by her), they often 
violate her prohibition on invoking paradisal visions of language. Given 
that the Language writers’ critique of language’s capacity to resist ideo -
logical contamination was so severe, this is perhaps surprising. These 
paradisal notions of language were not deployed uncritically, but rather, 
I want to suggest, were intended to negotiate how poets might interact 
with a system of signification (taken in the broadest sense: advertising, 
news, political speech, education) that they had come to mistrust in the 
wake of the 1960s.
In order to overcome the flood of ideology, so to speak, Language 
writers created their own flood of language—  often suffused with “proto-  
semantic” paradisal notions of communication, as well as with competing 
“post-  semantic” paranoid notions of language without reference. Accord -
ing to Barrett W atten, “The central problem of reference in [Language] 
 Paradise and Informatics  137
writing may be seen in a context as directly related to the administra -
tion of information about the W ar on the part of the government and 
media .”19 Disillusionment over the Vietnam W ar is central to the politics 
of Language writing, and yet the war had ended by the time most of the 
Language writers were actively publishing. W atten’s claim is particularly 
well suited to Andrews, whose Harvard Ph.D. dissertation investigated 
the escalation of the Vietnam W ar.20 What is particularly interesting 
about W atten’s phrasing is his invocation of the “administration of infor -
mation.” At the end of an era in which the counterculture had increas -
ingly made available hitherto-  taboo information about the body, as well 
as about the secret workings of the United States government, Richard 
Nixon was reelected in 1972. Neither the Freedom of Information Act 
(passed in 1966) nor the new sexual freedoms could by themselves do 
much to achieve the kind of social change the Language poets sought. 
My point here is not to rehearse familiar postwar history, but rather  
to demonstrate the ways in which sexuality, referentiality, and informa -
tion abundance are intertwined in the politics and poetics of the Lan -
guage poets.
“Paradise, Radius Parade”: Lyn Hejinian and the Gendering 
of Memory Storage
In her 1986 The Cell , Hejinian writes:
The romanticization of limping, of
sea- shells, of tenderness as
erotic curiosity, of battered paper,
of the paternal typewriter
Motherhood is so much information.21
The section from which I am quoting begins by describing “world-wide 
attention,” but soon suggests that such attention will not extend to the 
maternity ward. The “paternal typewriter,” it would seem, ignores the 
information-  saturated condition of modern motherhood. As in her Writ -
ing Is an Aid to Memory  and her better-  known My Life , the technici -
zation of memory figures prominently in the metaphorics of The Cell . 
These three works resist a paradise of total memory at the same time that 
they demonstrate a consistent attraction to an encyclopedic knowledge 
138 Paradise and Informatics
that is no longer off-  limits to women, and is no longer burdened by 
taboo. In engaging the power of domestic, private memory, Hejinian 
upsets the traditional privileging of public, authoritative knowledge—  
and yet she rejects a paradise of personal memory. As she describes,  
“My motives in composing Writing Is an Aid to Memory  were contrary 
to those of reminiscence; the work is neither anecdotal nor diaristic.  
I was aiming for something encyclopedic; I was interested in episte -
mology: in consciousness, in knowledge, in the ways that knowledge is 
organized and structured.”22 Hejinian’s use of personal memory, as well 
as her radically associative and disjunctive style, could well be described 
as meta-  autobiographical. In the face of an abundance of memories, 
Hejinian offers her readers too many choices. There can be no personal 
paradise, no retreating to an idealized life account. In the fittingly titled 
“The Person,” she writes:
There is no outside
position
Paradise, radius
parade23
If there is a paradise to be found, Hejinian would seem to suggest that 
it won’t be a regaining, nor will it be found in isolation.
Jacob Edmond’s essay “The Closures of the Open T ext: Lyn Hejinian’s 
‘Paradise Found’” discusses the figure extensively in Hejinian’s writing, 
and what follows is indebted to his account. My approach here is some -
what more general than Edmond’s, in that I discuss broader themes con -
cerning technology and information, and somewhat more specific, in that 
I link the figure of paradise more closely to historical events. Edmond 
suggests that Hejinian offers “two apparently antithetical paradises—  
paradise as language and paradise as totalizing, transcendent closure.”24 
According to Edmond, “Hejinian’s writing exhibits a striking preoccu -
pation with total linguistic transparency, correspondence between lan -
guage and world, epistemological closure, and perfect understanding, 
all of which she associates with the term paradise . Her essay ‘The Rejec -
tion of Closure’ (1984), her long poem The Guard  (1984), and her later 
essay ‘La Faustienne’ (1998) all grow, directly or indirectly, out of this 
preoccupation. In these texts, paradise, as complete closure and perfect 
 Paradise and Informatics  139
knowledge, partakes in a formal and thematic dialectic such that the 
reemergence of the desire for paradise always accompanies its repudia -
tion.”25 T o this account, I would add that Hejinian also associates the 
idea of paradise with perfect memory (retrospective “perfect knowledge”) 
as well as with an erotics of language. “It’s erotic to say everything,” she 
writes in The Guard .26 Edmond quotes a journal entry that illustrates 
explicitly the dilemma of the two paradises he describes within her 
writing: “Language is the guard of paradise. It doesn’t let one in. Then 
too it might be the garden of paradise.”27 T o put this in slightly different 
terms, a language of Adamic naming would convey perfect information. 
Hejinian rejects such a possibility, and yet the “metaframe” (as Edmond 
calls it) of a poem such as The Guard  continually reintroduces the notion 
of a liberated language that paradoxically obstructs access to a transparent 
politics of liberation. A language of posthuman Adamic naming might, 
in other words, convey an unlimited amount of unprocessable data.
Hejinian’s recurrent interest in the encyclopedic is closely related to 
her interest in the workings of memory. “My head is a shelf that holds 
encyclopedias,” she writes in The Guard .28 For Hejinian, the technici -
zation of memory suggests a kind of completion or closure that is at 
odds with poetic creation. She notes retrospectively that writing is a 
hindrance as well as an aid to memory: “Much as I enjoy the ‘list poems’ 
of T ed Berrigan, Bernadette Mayer, or Jack Collom, Writing Is an Aid  
to Memory  bears no relation to one, I don’t deny being attracted to sheer 
data—  but sheer data is like a lexicon, and though one wants to know  
as many words as possible, the essential thing is to put them together. 
Experience suggested that writing is indeed an aid to memory, but not 
solely, or even most significantly, because it can serve as a replacement 
for memory (which is what a list does).”29 Writing is disembodied mem -
ory; writing presents us with a profusion of possibilities. T oo many 
memories at once, resequenced and reduced for an external audience, 
are perhaps no longer “authentic” memories. Hejinian’s writing empha -
sizes the radical selectivity of memory. As she writes in “The Rejection 
of Closure,” “What stays in the gaps, so to speak, remains crucial and 
informative. Part of the reading occurs as the recovery of that informa -
tion (looking behind) and the discovery of newly structured ideas.”30 As 
she writes in My Life , “What follows a strict chronology has no mem -
ory.”31 The list presents an inhuman (or perhaps a posthuman) illusion 
of order; the role of the poet is to counteract this illusion of order.
140 Paradise and Informatics
One way Hejinian gets beyond the impasse of the dichotomy of 
paradise-  as- idealized-  language/paradise-  as- totalizing-  closure is to insist 
on the importance of drawing attention to classificatory structures: “If 
in the Edenic scenario we acquired knowledge of the animals by naming 
them, it was not by virtue of any numinous immanence in the name but 
because Adam was a taxonomist. He distinguished between the indi -
vidual animals, discovered the concept of categories, and then organized 
the various species according to their different functions and relation -
ships in the system. What the ‘naming’ provides is structure, not indi -
vidual words.”32 The “encyclopedic impulse,” as she calls it, presents a 
false paradise where structure has been overcome, where total memory 
overwhelms any ability to sift through experience. “The encyclopedic 
impulse” recollects passively; it privileges mind over body; it refuses to 
reclassify. Following Gertrude Stein, Hejinian insists on a pragmatic 
present-  tense engagement with knowing: “Knowledge, like speaking  
or writing, is not an entity but a function—  it would best be called 
‘knowing’—  and the purpose of that function is to contextualize—  to 
contextualize in the profoundest sense, so that knowledge is not only 
knowing of (which is experience in potentia) and knowing that (which 
generates propositions) but also knowing how.”33 Our “desire to possess 
knowledge,” she claims, “is wasteful of uncertainty.”34 So, too, is our 
desire for complete life records, for inclusive chronological accounts, as 
she writes in “The Person”: “Self-  consciousness is discontinuous / The 
very word  ‘diary’ / embarrasses me.”35
For Hejinian, to privilege the encyclopedic impulse is to normativ-  
ize a white, bourgeois subject position. She grapples with the difficulty 
of resisting a corporeal determinism at the same time that she insists on 
grounding experience in the individual body: “I am my thoughts, not 
my body. If I truly feel this, it is a product of gender-  liberating, and now 
age- defiant, willfulness or white middle-  class privilege? A or B? C. In 
any case, my thoughts are not all my own. And shouldn’t I have gotten 
over the mind–  body dichotomy by now? Isn’t privileging the mind over 
the body just that—  precisely a matter of privilege, the privilege of some -
one with a purportedly unmarked body?”36 In choosing C, Hejinian in 
a sense overcomes mind/body dualism and is able to retain imagina-  
tive agency while placing in doubt her own class privilege. “Money is the 
memory of my class,” she writes in My Life , gesturing to the ways in 
which memory is inextricably tied to the legitimization of the existing 
 Paradise and Informatics  141
family and class structure. An important role of the politically engaged 
writer would be to cast suspicion on conventional patterns of personal 
and collective memorialization. Alluding to Stein’s claim that “a sentence 
is not emotional a paragraph is,” Hejinian pairs paradise with paragraphs 
which presumably convey emotion: “Paradise and paragraphs / They can 
be indifferent / under the pink skin of distribution.”37 Paradise presumes 
equality, or perhaps even enforces a vision of equality, regardless of pres -
ent inequalities.
The most insistent inequality of all, that between men and women, 
Hejinian notes, is deeply inscribed within W estern epistemology. In the 
myth of Faust, “the female element  . . . is not the knower but the site of 
knowledge, its object and embodiment—  that which is to be known.”38 
In a characteristic reversal, Hejinian muses on a Faustienne rather than 
a Faust. By reversing the gaze, the Faustienne is able to attain a different 
kind of self-  consciousness—  without pushing the metaphor too far,  
one might even suggest that the Faustienne is able to achieve a kind of 
“double consciousness” of which Faust is incapable—  since she is able  
to be both knower and known. In a work such as The Cell , Hejinian 
radically collapses the difference between viewer and viewed, as well as 
between the unitary (the cell) and the collective (the organism compris -
ing cells). Hejinian describes the pleasure of a kind of partial knowl -
edge, which does not renounce information, but rather questions the 
forms it takes:
The information is like a
balmy palpitation
I like everything at a
level below its name39
T o “like everything at a / level below its name,” we might surmise, is to 
reject the certainty of Edenic naming. Charles Bernstein deploys a sim -
ilar metaphorics in his 1991 poem “The Kiwi Bird in the Kiwi Tree”:  
“I want no paradise only to be / drenched in the downpour of words, / 
fecund with tropicality.”40
For both Hejinian and Bernstein, “the downpour of words” suggests 
a communicative paradise that might help to resist the post-  1970s para -
dise of personal consumption. In “The Culture Industry,” Adorno and 
Horkheimer write, “The paradise offered by the culture industry is the 
142 Paradise and Informatics
same old drudgery. Both escape and elopement are pre-  designed to lead 
back to the starting point. Pleasure promotes the resignation which it 
ought to help to forget.”41 In My Life in the Nineties , Hejinian continues 
to write of such a consumer paradise: “They were having the subjec-  
tivity of consumers, lacking objectivity amid abundant objects.”42 The 
job of the poet is to redistribute facts in order to get “under the pink 
skin of distribution.” This is not necessarily to fictionalize facts, but 
rather to question the acculturated force of purportedly neutral facts. In 
creating paratactic, nonchronological biographical accounts, Hejinian 
insists that “there are no unequal facts.”43 “Facticity consists in being at 
origin (speaking here not of the original how but of the original why) 
inexplicable (a fact has original inexplicability: that’s a fact, bingo! No 
fact is flat).”44 Facts imply points of origin, but no fact is innocent or 
guilty. Hejinian champions an epistemological model that places pri -
mary importance on collective rather than individual perception. As she 
writes in My Life in the Nineties , “W e perceive nothing but relationships—  
perception itself is that.”45
For Hejinian, a comprehensive understanding of our relations to 
others might come as close as we are to get to paradise. This can perhaps 
only be achieved through representing consciousness as discontinuous, 
and extending the span of our attention: “The desire to tell within the 
conditions of a discontinuous consciousness seems to constitute the orig -
inal situation of the poem. The discontinuity of consciousness is inter -
woven through the continuity of reality—  a reality whose independence 
of our experience and descriptions must be recognized. In response,  
the poetic impulse, attempting (never successfully) to achieve the condi -
tion that the phrase ‘language and “paradise’” names, seeks to extend the 
scope and temporal continuity of consciousness.”46 Hejinian does not 
posit that there is a “level  . . . below the name,” a proto-  semantic (or 
perhaps post-  semantic) layer to which we can ascribe a kind of continu -
ity of meaning. If mass culture and technological memory give us the 
illusion of continuity, it is the role of poetry to disabuse us of that illu -
sion. Hejinian cautions us against modernist attempts at total meaning: 
“What of the inclusive impulse—  ‘all of it’—  which is so characteristic of 
modernist approaches to comprehension and control? If we accept the 
notion that knowledge is always and only embedded, always and only 
situated, we must give up the aspiration to ‘know everything.’”47 In the 
face of a society of control, we might even surmise that Hejinian’s writings 
 Paradise and Informatics  143
ask us to lose control, to forget some things, to remain unfocused—  at 
least some of the time.
The intricate conclusion to Writing Is an Aid to Memory  brings 
together themes related to information, attention, and perception—  at 
the same time that it refers back to the poem’s enigmatic beginning.  
The opening line of the book is “apple is shot nod,” which Hejinian has 
noted refers to William T ell. The apple could also refer to the forbidden 
fruit of knowledge. The poem transitions rapidly—  beneath the level of 
the “new sentence” as a unit—  as if to represent the consistently shifting 
processes of immediate consciousness:
think is shot
motion is debate to the eye
I have got a foothold and a doubt
of talk trucks distraction of a visit glass
understanding comes forgiveness thinks
disclosure
unable is not to concentrate mostly
limb
mind on minded put
bit supported the other deaths drawn of a distraction
the situation is in fast with fast evidence
it is not a rarity
I glance toward what the eye can pronounce aside
an addition of information must fly48
Despite the seeming randomness of its thematics, the poem mentions 
distraction twice, and with the line “unable is not to concentrate mostly” 
it would seem to mimic the phenomenon of “continuous partial atten -
tion” described in chapter 1. The negative “unable is not” as well as the 
qualifying “mostly” make it almost impossible to focus on the “fast evi -
dence” of the continual “addition of information.” In fact, the method  
of the poem would seem to be mostly subtractive rather than additive. 
The poem’s dominant constraint is to indent the beginning of each line 
according to the position of the first letter’s place in the alphabet (thus 
“apple is shot nod” is fully left justified). At its conclusion, it is almost  
as if information has flown out of the poem. Information, no matter 
how abundant, cannot restore us to Eden, the poem seems to be saying. 
144 Paradise and Informatics
“Time is storage,” she writes in The Cell.49 There is no escape from the 
perpetual process of remembering and forgetting—  our experiences are 
inscribed and erased at every instant. As she writes earlier in the book:
ideas move and move the thinker
more parted, pasted dog up
in return far of the information.50
The Poetics of Overdeterminacy: Bruce Andrews  
and the Libidinal Economics of Information
In Lip Service , his epic modeled on Dante’s Paradiso , Andrews poses a 
fascinating, and perhaps unanswerable question: “Is it even remotely 
conceivable / that a woman could have written this?”51 Without answer -
ing this question directly, Barbara Cole has suggested that the predom -
inant reason Andrews’s writing “is not better known [is] because it is 
written by a man.”52 Cole argues provocatively that Andrews is an
exemplary practitioner of écriture feminine — doing what so many of his fe-  
male contemporaries have not dared to do: to break syntactic convention  . . . 
What we can’t digest in Andrews’s poetry is what the speakers them -
selves have trouble swallowing. These voices—  or perhaps more aptly, these 
lip syncers—  repeat what every hole has already absorbed. But what trans -
forms these lip synced sound bites beyond mere ventriloquism is the genius 
of Lip Service ’s fluid vibrations and stop-  cut undulations. The sexuality—  
 in content and form—  is undeniable at every step of the way but, certainly, 
this is a cerebral sexuality. Indeed, Andrews gives new meaning to the 
notion of  “giving head.”53
Cole suggests that although Andrews is “an exemplary practitioner of 
écriture feminine ,” he also “forces us to consider the essentialist fallacy  
of écriture feminine. ”54 As Hélène Cixous makes clear in “The Laugh  
of the Medusa,” one does not have to be a woman in order to write  
in opposition to écriture patriarchal.55 Given the plurality of voices in 
Andrews’s work—  and that Andrews admits discomfort with some of 
what those voices (typically in sound bite form) have to say—  it is difficult 
to assign the kind of agency to his writing that we typically depend on 
an “author function” to provide. The polyvocalism of Andrews’s writing 
 Paradise and Informatics  145
makes it almost impossible to know who is speaking, much less to 
assign gender roles.
Overdetermination has arguably become so standard within the con -
temporary critical lexicon that we neglect both the history and the im-  
plications of the term. Coined by Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams , 
“overdetermination” took on a new political urgency in the 1960s. Con -
sider the use of the term by Norman O. Brown (whom Andrews has 
cited as an influence) in the 1966 Love’s Body : “ A vast pun, a free play, 
with unlimited substitutions. A symbol is never a symbol but always 
polysymbolic, overdetermined, polymorphous. Freedom is fertility; a 
proliferation of images, in excess. The seed must be sown wastefully, 
extravagantly. T oo much, or not enough; overdetermination is determi -
nation made into chance; chance and determination reconciled. T oo 
much meaning is meaning and absurdity reconciled.”56 Andrews has 
consistently rejected aleatory procedures, but his work in many ways 
both embodies and resists the kind of liberation championed by Brown. 
In claiming that “Power is the surplus of the sign,” Andrews would seem 
to suggest that all language is overdetermined.57 But overdetermination 
in Andrews’s writing, rather than sowing confusion and doubt, becomes 
celebrated for its potential to free us from repression. Louis Althusser’s 
account of overdetermination in his 1965 For Marx  (it is worth nothing 
that Andrews was in Paris shortly after the events of May 1968) is far 
bleaker than Brown’s:
Ideology  . . . is the expression of the relation between men and their “world,” 
that is, the (overdetermined) unity of the real relation and the imaginary 
relation between them and their real conditions of existence.  . . . It is in this 
overdetermination of the real by the imaginary and of the imaginary by the 
real that ideology is active in principle, that it reinforces or modifies the 
relations between men and their conditions of existence, in the imaginary 
relation itself. It follows that this action can never be purely instrumental; 
the men who would use an ideology purely as a means of action, as a tool, 
find that they have been caught by it, implicated by it, just when they are 
using it and believe themselves to be the absolute masters of it.58
Key to Althusser’s account is the claim that ideology is not merely  
false consciousness, but inheres in all social relations under capitalism. 
Because ideology has so many input causes, it is impossible to get at the 
146 Paradise and Informatics
“real conditions of existence.” Ideology, according to Althusser, “does not 
just refer to apparently unique and aberrant historical situations (Ger -
many, for example) but is universal.”59 For Althusser, we are all (poets 
and philosophers included) subject to overdetermination.
Andrews’s writings could be said (in an appropriately overdetermined 
fashion perhaps!) to operate according to Brown’s favorable account of 
overdetermination at the same time that they also operate according  
to Althusser’s far more grim account. In the 1977 “T ext and Context,” 
Andrews writes:
Engulfment, flooding of signifiers without predetermined signification. 
Instead, the clichés of existentialism—  freedom, surplus of signifiers, choice 
as constitutive & we do it ourselves.
Politics not concealed any longer.60
Paradise as “a total repertoire of possibilities” suggests that acknowledg -
ing and appropriating the power of overdetermination might be a way 
to resist predetermined outcomes. In order to achieve effects which put 
into practice ideology critique at the same time that they question the 
efficacy of liberatory discourses, Andrews continually returns to a poet -
ics of surplus signification, and he does so in what is perhaps the most 
consistently disjunctive manner of any of the Language writers.
Andrews’s writing is supremely indicative of Language writing’s alter -
nating love–  hate relationship with the power of language-  in- excess to 
liberate as well as to obfuscate. Carla Billitteri has recently offered a 
reading of post-  Olsonian American poetics which suggests that Cratyl -
ism (a model of language which has much in common with Judeo-  
Christian notions of paradisal Adamic naming) is central to the politics 
of Language writing. Billitteri argues that
neo-  Cratylism as a political program is put forward most exuberantly by 
Andrews  . . . While affirming consistently that language is not natural but 
socially constructed, that meaning is not inherent to words but the func -
tion of a rule-  governed system, that language refers to an external reality 
only by convention, and that the relationship between language and social 
order is indirect, Andrews again and again expresses a Cratylist desire for 
a form of writing that can engage language prior to social construction, for 
a nonsyntactical writing of meaning-  embodied words, for an instantiation 
 Paradise and Informatics  147
of the real within writing, and for a direct effect on the social order through 
poetic practice.61
It is perhaps counterintuitive to label Andrews a Cratylist, given how 
difficult it can be to assign fixed meaning to his writings. Consider the 
following passage, for instance:
With this, purchase paradise
helps it sublimer wish not want
so then give me a ring attached
releases the subjectivity of destroyed subjects—  
mass cloak dial-  a- tribe62
W e are confronted here by too much and not enough information.  
Perhaps “this” with which to purchase paradise is the paradiso  we have 
presumably purchased and are holding in our hands—  but this would 
seem to lead in a circle, as would releasing the “subjectivity of destroyed 
subjects.”63 The flip side of engaging language “prior to its social con -
struction” could be engaging language after its social destruction.
Peter Quartermain has suggested forcefully that Lip Service  should 
be read as a critique of the degraded language that surrounds contem -
porary sexuality and its commercialization:
The portrayal of the Beloved in Lip Service  runs savagely counter to the 
myth of women and sexuality purveyed in the market place and the enter -
tainment industry (to say nothing of the Paradiso ), yet at the same time it 
clearly reflects it: by and large, women in this poem—  and especially in the 
first five sections—  are, like women in advertisements, unreflective and 
largely uncritical creatures whose major interests and passions revolve 
around cosmetics, breast implants, sexual performance and social stand -
ing; vain, manipulative, inconstant, they seem by and large to participate 
more or less willingly in a life which is, by any standards, undesirable and 
indeed dehumanised—  as the poem proceeds, its title comes among other 
things to suggest joyless oral sex. This paradise is a Hell in which women 
are more or less willingly complicit in their own damnation.64
Quartermain acknowledges that Andrews may well be writing in the 
persona of a woman—  but he also notes that the poem, as its title would 
148 Paradise and Informatics
suggest, makes it impossible to assign direct, sincere agency. The poem 
could well be described as a compendium of sexually taboo language. 
The net effect is to inspire disgust. Sianne Ngai has suggested that  
“no contemporary American poet has continued the modernist avant-  
garde’s project of decoupling art from beauty, or developed the negative 
aesthetic already latent in Kant’s definition of the disgusting as the end -
point of mimetic art, as consistently or aggressively as Andrews.”65
One would not typically associate exuberant Cratylism with a poetics 
of disgust. What accounts for Andrews being simultaneously a laureate of 
Cratylism and a laureate of disgust is his insistence on a poetics grounded 
in the body. Andrews’s writing is replete with bodies with organs but 
without identities. His interest in the commodification of the eroticized 
body, and the ways in which bodies are modified, supplemented, and 
marketed, suggests a profound interest in issues of biopower (a term 
first popularized in English by Foucault’s 1978 History of Sexuality ). Bob 
Perelman has situated Andrews’s interest in the body at the core of his 
work, arguing that it provides him with a point of reference from which 
to attack the ubiquitous language of capital. According to Perelman:
As markets become saturated there is a steady demand for flashier items 
that are also firmly saleable. The processes of commodification are ubiqui -
tous and can make the segue from Jackson Pollock to new Formica pat -
terns seem as inevitable as the seasons.
In attempting to avoid such aesthetic innocuousness, Andrews pins his 
hopes on the body. It is not the site of identity or self-  expression; rather,  
it is something of a utopian counterweight to the various registers of false 
rhetoric he feels surrounded by.66
Andrews’s emphasis on the body (and the bawdy) represents an attempt 
to achieve “paradise,” a place beyond signification and ideology, and per -
haps also beyond gender and class identity. But this potentially para -
disal place of authentic communication is subject to something like an 
infinite regress given the conditions of artificial desire and artificial 
meaning imposed by late capitalist societies. There would seem to be  
no place for the unconscious in Andrews’s poetry. Even if there is an 
individuated, non-  commodified unconscious, Andrews’s writing places 
in question whether it is possible to liberate the unconscious without a 
more radical questioning of the entire realm of signification.
 Paradise and Informatics  149
Jerome McGann has written that “nothing is more obdurate than the 
writing of Bruce Andrews.”67 In the sense that Andrews’s writing stub -
bornly refuses a personal paradise through an insistence on the artifici -
ality of the consumer paradise, it is unparalleled in its obduracy. But it 
might also be said that Andrews’s writings—  and here Lip Service  and 
Love Songs  are exemplary—  demand that we acknowledge the vulnera -
bility of docile bodies: deeply flawed, leaking bodies with which no one 
is ever satisfied. These are not perfected posthuman specimens. These 
are the bodies of victims and victimizers. In the 1979 “Writing Social 
W ork and Political Practice,” Andrews writes of his poetics as “an anti-  
systemic detonation of settled relations, an anarchic liberation of energy 
flows. Such flows, like libidinal discharges, are thought to exist under -
neath & independent from the system of language. That system, an 
armoring, entraps them in codes & grammar. Normative grammar—  a 
machine for the accumulation of meaning seen as surplus value & for 
territorializing the surface relations among signifiers by converting them 
into an efficient pointing system.”68 As much as Andrews insists on the 
power of libidinal excess to reconfigure social relations, his writings, 
through their tireless invocation of libidinal excess, demonstrate that 
such energy flows exist within , as well as beneath , the system of language. 
Andrews’s fierce and uncompromising attack on the “efficient pointing 
system” implies that a more libidinally liberated language may not nec -
essarily offer a more accurate representation of social relations.
In his essay “Be Careful Now Y ou Know Sugar Melts in W ater,” 
Andrews offers perhaps his fullest account of the role of sexuality 
within his writings. He describes a pervasive technologization of the 
body, which overwhelms our ability to access and liberate our genuine 
desires:
technology may be an extension of the body. here, it suggests an interior 
technologizing of bodily desires which extend, or rivet, them right back 
inside. so escapes from social fixity by means of precipitation look more  
& more inadequate as a response to this near-  inclusive set tossed over  
our wants & needs. to assume that we face a model of repression could 
encourage us simply to loosen the bonds of constraint. but if we face a 
mode of activation of sex, of harnessed desublimation, of privatized social -
ization, what is left but to recognize (to rewrite) the rules, the roles, & the 
stereotypes.69
150 Paradise and Informatics
W e cannot “simply . . . loosen the bonds of restraint” without considering 
how even our most intimate desires may be influenced by the techno -
cratic consumerist society in which we live. In order to function smoothly, 
capitalism requires noise-  reduction devices. In response, voices of resis -
tance need to become “building blocks of noise.” Andrews suggests that 
the most effective opposition might take the form of collective noise—  
not necessarily of the vuvuzela variety, but rather “noise as wayward, 
unregimented sound. Or seemingly meaningless, random fluctuations 
in data—  not the ‘managed data’ that defines information. T oo irregular, 
or pumped up with excess timbral richness, its overtones untameable  
in harmonic terms, undercutting expectations of determinate pitch (or, 
in our case, of a representational determinacy and bolstering).”70 To  
resist “managed data,” in this formulation, is to suggest that the orderly 
operations of consumer capitalism can be challenged by interrupting 
the patterning of data, and by extension music. Given how total the grip 
of ideology is over contemporary society, noise in this model is not only 
a necessary countermeasure, but also comparatively determinate in that 
it does not allow for the further spread of ideology (or misinformation).
If it is difficult to assign individual agency to the sound bite voices in 
Andrews’s writing, it is even more difficult to discern distinct temporal 
or narrative markers. A traditional feature of lyric poetry is its invoca -
tion of personal time or of powerful recollected memory—  a poem such 
as “Tintern Abbey” reflects on the passage of five years in the life of its 
author. But it is difficult to find an Andrews poem in which the poet 
reflects directly on the passage of personal time. In a sense, we might say 
that there can be no innocence in Andrews’s writing because there is no 
sense of a personal before or after. Andrews minimizes the intrusion of 
a lyric voice by working extensively with collaged material. More specifi -
cally, he works from a voluminous supply of slips of paper.71 These slips 
often predate the composition of his poems by years, or even decades.  
I would propose that, contrary to the Romantic model of spontaneous 
inspiration from internalized memory, Andrews is working for the most 
part with exteriorized memory. Bernard Stiegler draws a distinction 
between exteriorized or technicized memory, which he calls hypomnesis , 
and anamnesis , which he uses “to designate the embodied act of remem -
bering.”72 Andrews’s writing largely precludes the W ordsworthian act  
of anamnesis, instead plunging us into an anarchic, atemporal world of 
found language, remembered only through technical means. According 
 Paradise and Informatics  151
to Stiegler, “Human life is no longer simply biological: it is a technical 
economy of desire sustained by hypomnesic technical milieus, symbolic 
milieus in which drives find themselves submitted to a principle of real -
ity that requires the postponement of their satisfaction. As a result of 
this symbolic mediation, an economy arises through which the energy 
of the drives is transformed into libidinal energy, that is, into desire and 
sublimation.”73 It is here perhaps that Andrews and Hejinian converge: 
both are centrally concerned with the “technical economy of desire.” 
Writing is an aid to desire. Is that an archive in your pocket or are you 
just happy to see me? Everyday language, and everyday practices of 
memory, are suffused with languages of desire that are not our own. 
The posthuman Adam is a figure who denies history; he only imagines 
he creates his own language. The posthuman Eve cannot name, but only 
rename. Perhaps freed of their traditional gender roles they might seek, 
on their own or together, a version of the “‘paradise’ for which writing 
yearns—  a flowering focus on a distant infinity.”74 Paradise, it should be 
noted, is placed in quotes.
This page intentionally left blank 
1536
VANGUARD  
TOTAL INDEX
CONCEPTUAL WRITING, INFORMATION 
ASYMMETRY, AND THE DATA GLUT
Ubu usurps much usufruct. Ubu sums up lump sums.
— Christian Bök, Eunoia
Why is an index dear to him. He has thousands of gesticulations.
— Gertrude Stein, “ Advertisements”
The past decade has seen a proliferation of works of constrained 
and appropriated writing that incorporate the forms of the index, 
the database, and the catalog. These forms embody what Lev Manovich 
describes as “the database logic” of new media.1 Manovich asks, “How 
can our new abilities to store vast amounts of data, to automatically 
index, link, search, and instantly retrieve it, lead to new kinds of narra -
tives?”2 If one replaces the word “narratives” with “poetry,” that question 
could be considered the central theme of this chapter. Conceptual writ -
ing’s appropriation strategies, I suggest, offer some preliminary answers. 
Robert Fitterman maintains that conceptual writing’s distinguishing 
feature is its use of appropriated texts “in large, unmodified chunks—  a 
paragraph, a page, a whole book,” in order to “reframe works that already 
exist in new contexts  . . . which, in turn, instigates new ways to poten -
tially realize our place as text artists in a network culture.”3 According to 
Kenneth Goldsmith, “In the face of an unprecedented amount of digital 
text, writing needs to redefine itself in order to adapt to the new envi -
ronment of textual abundance.”4 Flarf poetry, by contrast to conceptual 
poetry, is composed of smaller, more discrete textual fragments, and is 
154 V anguard T otal Index
said to more closely resemble earlier poetic appropriation strategies that 
allow poets greater agency in the selection of source materials.5
I make the case here that by adopting strategies of passive indexing , 
conceptual writing demonstrates considerable self-  reflexivity with respect 
to the conditions of its own existence and dissemination in an era of 
instantaneous global information flows. Moreover, this writing points 
to distinctive changes in the nature of the global economy over the past 
two decades, highlighting the emergence of what Ulrich Beck terms the 
“risk society,” or what Jacob Hacker calls “the great risk shift,” wherein 
financial risk has shifted from governments and corporations to indi -
viduals (in the form, for instance, of privatized retirement plans).6 All 
the works surveyed in this chapter thematize in some manner the rela -
tion of a writer to a data set—  raising important questions concerning 
matters of privacy, authenticity, identity, and information asymmetry. 
These works are not, for the most part, directly prescriptive of social 
change. They more often take the form of parodic compendia. Rather 
than refusing conventional syntax at the level of the sentence in the man -
ner of the Language poets, these works for the most part operate by 
restructuring and reframing aggregate data.
Broadly speaking, I am construing conceptual writing concerned with 
the nature and structure of information systems as indexical in form. In 
using the term index, I am referring more to the bureaucratic forms 
taken by large quantities of information than to the linguistic sense  
of indexicality developed by Charles Sanders Peirce.7 Indexes are the 
ultimate archival form—  no library, not even a Borgesian one, can ever 
purport to be absolutely complete. Indexical art and writing presents 
tricky theoretical questions with regard to originality, translation, and 
transcoding. Indexes can be used to measure almost anything—  includ -
ing, perhaps, the impossibility of “getting outside” the institutions of late 
capitalist bourgeois culture. Financial, bibliographic, biomedical, and 
demographic indexes all bear witness to the forms taken by the bureau -
cratic mechanisms of contemporary capitalism—  to which conceptual -
ism bears an uneasy relation. The writer or artist herself is often subject 
to the index. The index fund, a comparatively recent financial innovation, 
exemplifies this phenomenon. Most knowledge workers, poets included, 
participate in retirement plans that own index funds which passively 
track stock and bond markets. Does this mean that poets, too, are own -
ers of Apple, the world’s largest corporation by market capitalization? 
 V anguard T otal Index  155
This is not the place for an extensive consideration of the ethics of invest -
ment: my point here is simply that every index in some sense begs the 
question of the total index. T o change the course of capitalism, the Lan -
guage poets tirelessly suggested, it is necessary to consider one’s position 
(or “positionality”) within the system of political economy as a whole. By 
adopting the form of the index, conceptual writing investigates the place 
of the writer within global networks of aesthetic and economic valuation.
Although indexes are often taken to be passive accumulations of 
data, they inevitably reflect the values and biases of their creators. Much 
indexical writing is clearly dystopian in its critique of information sys -
tems, but indexical writing is also in some sense literally utopian in  
that it is often of “no place”; it substitutes categorical appropriation for 
local expression. The author is not dead; the author, like the electronic 
investor, inhabits multiple locations at once. The author as “content  
provider” or “data processor” exists as a function rather than as a physi -
cally or geographically locatable source of meaning. Perloff has recently 
suggested that “only by adopting the language of the library and the 
database—  the language of facts, dates, historical ledger, map, dictionary, 
biographical entry, literary quotation—  can the contemporary poet cre -
ate what is paradoxically a new poetic sphere.”8 Conceptual writing places 
in question our notions of individual agency, and our ability to sequester 
ourselves from the global. This returns us to the question of the poet’s 
place within the index, database, or catalog. W ords now travel, for better 
and worse, instantaneously across borders. W e are all being indexed all 
the time. Rodrigo T oscano writes somewhat facetiously that “all poetic 
installments must index the wiles (as well as vagaries) of current global 
class struggle as currently acted out in the (writer’s) text-  designer’s 
actual locale of habitation.”9 As T oscano, who describes himself as hav -
ing “grown up on the borderlands of California,” well knows, the writer’s 
“actual locale” is often in flux, and the writer’s place of residence may be 
far less significant than her institutional setting.
Institutional critique is among the most important concerns of con -
ceptual art and writing, and is closely related to conceptual writing’s 
emphasis on practices of classifying, storing, and disseminating informa -
tion.10 Lucy Lippard’s Six Y ears , perhaps the most influential historical 
account of conceptual art, is itself an indexical sampling of a movement 
characterized by sampling. The long, eighteenth-  century-  esque subtitle 
of the book is an essay unto itself: “The dematerialization of the art 
156 V anguard T otal Index
object from 1966 to 1972: a cross-  reference book of information on some 
esthetic boundaries: consisting of a bibliography into which are inserted 
a fragmented text, art works, documents, interviews, and symposia, 
arranged chronologically and focused on so-  called conceptual or infor -
mation or idea art with mentions of such vaguely designated areas as 
minimal, anti-  form, systems, earth, or process art, occurring now in the 
Americas, Europe, England, Australia, and Asia (with occasional polit -
ical overtones), edited and annotated by Lucy R. Lippard.”11 The title  
is all encompassing at the same time that it refuses to commit to any 
one of its multiple slogans. Only Africa and Antarctica are left out of 
the book’s totalizing purview, and yet the book advertises itself in self-  
deprecatingly bureaucratic terms as merely a “cross-  reference book of 
information” and a “bibliography.” Sol LeWitt famously declared in 1966 
that “the serial artist does not attempt to produce a beautiful or mysteri -
ous object but functions merely as a clerk cataloging the results of his 
premise.”12 Six Y ears  might best be described as a catalog, although the 
word (perhaps because of its associations in the art world with the gal -
lery system) is absent from Lippard’s title.
Numerous examples of 1960s conceptual artworks concerned with 
the indexing and cataloging of information could be cited here. Craig 
Dworkin has recently suggested that “the guiding concept behind con -
ceptual poetry may be the idea of language as quantifiable data.”13 The 
same could be said of a number of conceptual works from the 1960s—   
such as On Kawara’s One Million Y ears  or Vito Acconci’s list poems or 
the index-  based works of the Art & Language group. Like Six Y ears , the 
1970 Information  show at the Museum of Modern Art aspired to be 
global in scope.14 The show emerged out of an attempt by MoMA to 
placate the Art W orker’s Coalition, among whose members was Dan 
Graham, who in a 1969 statement declared, “What does the artist have 
in common with his friends, his public, his society? Information about 
himself, themselves, and all ourselves—  which is not reduced to ideas or 
material.”15 Throughout the late 1960s, Graham was centrally concerned 
with information systems. Eve Meltzer’s description of the Information  
show serves also as a useful overview of Graham’s concerns during the 
period: “‘This is the dream of the information world’ , they [the Informa -
tion artists] seem to be telling us. A dream (indeed a nightmare for many) 
of the world as a total sign system, where even language has been stripped 
of affect and pared of everything save the bones of its infrastructure; a 
 V anguard T otal Index  157
dream that sometimes promises revolution, but just as often threatens 
to completely dissociate cause and effect, sign and referent, subject and 
world.”16 Of his works, Graham’s “Schema” perhaps most fully accom -
plishes the stripping of affect and intentionality from language, leav-  
ing behind only the “bones of its infrastructure.” In notes on “Schema,” 
Graham explicitly states his goal of reducing (or expanding) the “poem” 
to convey the most basic, but also context-  variable, information regard -
ing its execution:
A page exists each time as in-  formation (information): its subject matter is 
in- formation.
It takes place as in-  formation in terms of the base (constituents) of place.
As it takes place, its in-  formation structure appears to uphold its 
decomposition (simultaneously as it is composed in the same process) in 
terms of the base constituents of (its) place.
[. . .]
Systems of in-  format seem to exist somewhere half-  way between mate -
rial and concept, without being either of these (categories).17
For Graham, information can both mark place as well as erode its spec -
ificity. His 1969 “ INcoMe (Outflow) PIece” situates the artist amid not 
merely the art market, but larger financial markets as well. Graham pro -
posed to sell stock in himself—  or rather in “Dan Graham, Inc.”—  as a 
means to make the process of creating and selling his art more trans -
parent. In a series of newspaper ads, Graham quite literally inserted him -
self into the marketplace for ideas. In describing “his object (motive),” 
Graham wrote that he wanted “to make public information on social 
motives and categorization whose structure upholds, reveals in its func -
tioning, the socio-  economic support system of media.”18
Much changed between the 1960s and the 2000s, of course, but in 
terms of conceptual practices centered on questions of information and 
informatics, the rise of the personal computer and the Internet are 
(unsurprisingly) of paramount importance. Detractors of conceptual 
writing have suggested that the four-  decade lag between the emergence 
of conceptual art and conceptual writing results either from the desire 
of conceptual writers to draw on the prestige of the art world, or from a 
willful ignorance of the achievements of 1970s and 1980s writers work -
ing with appropriation techniques.19 Proponents of conceptual writing, 
158 V anguard T otal Index
on the other hand, have frequently emphasized that conceptual writing 
responds to an utterly transformed media landscape. Dworkin writes 
that “in a world of increasingly capacious and inexpensive storage media, 
the proliferation of conceptual practices comes as no surprise  . . . Con -
ceptual poetry, accordingly, often operates as an interface—  returning the 
answer to a particular query; assembling, rearranging, and displaying in-  
formation; or sorting and selecting from files of accumulated language 
pursuant to a certain algorithm—  rather than producing new material 
from scratch. Even if it does not involve electronics or computers, con -
ceptual poetry is thus very much a part of its technological and cultural 
moment.”20 By functioning both like, and as, an interface, conceptual 
poetry draws renewed attention to the ways in which information is 
conveyed and categorized. Conceptual art of the 1960s, though it was 
centrally concerned with the forms taken by large data sets, was pro -
duced during the era of the mainframe, before powerful distributed 
information networks were widely available to individual users. The 
term “data base,” according to the OED , was first used in 1962; the term 
“metadata” in 1969. Conceptual artists in the 1960s could only begin to 
envision the emergence of a world in which among all members of the 
G7 group of developed nations, upward of “70% of Gross Domestic 
Product depends on intangible goods, which are information related, 
not on material goods.”21
The first indexed stock fund, introduced by V anguard in 1976, has 
sub sequently grown to become the world’s largest mutual fund. The 
strategy of passive indexing emerged as a result of Burton Malkiel’s 1973 
A Random W alk Down W all Street , which demonstrated that most pro -
fessional money managers (and their actively managed funds) could  
not outperform a randomly chosen index of stocks or bonds. Though 
probably unknown to most conceptual writers, A Random Walk  may be 
the most influential investment book written in the second half of the 
twentieth century. “The logic behind this strategy [of indexing],” accord -
ing to Malkiel, “is the logic of the efficient market theory.”22 Regard-  
less of whether the investor necessarily believes in the market’s ability  
to price assets efficiently or ethically, the assumption is that over time 
stock and bond markets in the aggregate will provide greater returns 
than conventional savings accounts or government retirement pro -
grams. Malkiel’s simple hypothesis resulted in the “passive allocation” of 
trillions of dollars over the past three decades. In part, the index fund 
 V anguard T otal Index  159
responded to the problem of “information asymmetry” (a term which 
came into circulation in the 1970s with the rise of information econom -
ics).23 Given that corporations could devote far greater resources to 
researching the market, the individual investor would likely always be  
at a disadvantage in terms of allocating capital. Rather than buy into 
one part of the system of capital, in the form of an individual stock or 
bond, investors could now in effect buy into the market as a whole.
In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, the “efficient market hypothe -
sis” came under increasing scrutiny. Eugene Fama, considered “the father 
of the efficient market hypothesis,” offers this definition: “It says prices 
reflect all available information  . . . one of the founding principles of capi -
talism is that prices provided good signals for the allocation of resources, 
and that’s basically the principle of efficient markets.”24 The difficulty in 
2008, of course, was that prices did not reflect all available information. 
Even the most well-  informed (or purportedly well-  informed) market 
participants and observers claimed that they did not understand the 
nature of derivatives and other complex financial products. A postcrisis 
article in The Economist  went so far as to claim that the crisis had been 
caused by “big data”: “During the recent financial crisis it became clear 
that banks and rating agencies had been relying on models which, 
although they required a vast amount of information to be fed in, failed 
to reflect financial risk in the real world. This was the first crisis to be 
sparked by big data—  and there will be more.”25 Of course, not everyone 
was on the wrong end of information asymmetry, and many corpora -
tions and hedge funds profited handsomely. And even at corporations 
that failed, many executives received extraordinary compensation. The 
previously obscure term “moral hazard” (borrowed from the insurance 
industry) soon entered the popular lexicon. According to Paul Krugman, 
“moral hazard” refers “to any situation in which one person makes the 
decision about how much risk to take, while someone else bears the cost 
if things go badly.”26 By socializing private losses on a massive scale in 
the wake of the crisis, governments around the world largely absolved 
corporations and their executives of “moral hazard.” In the United 
States at least, attempts to mitigate risk for lower-  income individuals 
and families, by contrast, were largely ineffective.27 From Hurricane 
Katrina to the subprime crisis, the federal government showed itself to 
be increasingly unwilling to mitigate individual risk.28 While the 1930s 
and 1960s saw unprecedented expansions of the social safety net in the 
160 V anguard T otal Index
United States, the 1980s saw much of the safety net dismantled, and the 
1990s and 2000s saw further erosions. Upon his reelection in 2004, Pres -
ident George W . Bush’s first pledge was to privatize social security. After 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, such a move became 
politically untenable even on the far right, and yet there were few signs 
that the shifting of risk from governments to individuals had slowed. 
Information might have become more abundant than ever, but the onus 
was increasingly on individuals (and/or families) to ensure that they 
used that information to procure the right mortgage, the right insurance, 
or the right retirement plan—  or else face personal financial disaster.29
I offer this brief overview of the financial crisis to underscore three 
salient points concerning conceptual works that feature indexical appro -
priation: (1) the strategy of passive indexing mimics the informatiza-  
tion as well as the financialization of the global economy; (2) indexical 
appropriation typically implies the embeddedness of the writer within 
the economy and/or the mass media; and (3) indexical appropriation 
raises important issues related to the ownership of information and the 
consequences of asymmetric information.30
A number of critics, including Charles Bernstein, Joshua Clover, and 
Christopher Nealon, have considered the ramifications of the financial 
crisis for American avant-  garde poetry.31 Charles Bernstein parodies 
both the data glut and the financial crisis to great effect in his mock 
address “Poetry Bailout Will Restore Confidence of Readers,” delivered, 
appropriately enough, in late 2008 at the release of the year’s Best Ameri -
can Poetry  volume. According to Bernstein, “The glut of illiquid, insol -
vent, and troubled poems is clogging the literary arteries of the W est. 
These debt-  ridden poems threaten to infect other areas of the liter-  
ary sector and ultimately to topple our culture industry.”32 Poetry is, in 
effect, caught in a liquidity trap: “The risks poets have taken have been 
too great; the aesthetic negligence has been profound.”33 There are too 
many poems and not enough readers; the literary establishment, like 
the banking system, can no longer inspire confidence: “What began as  
a subprime poetry problem on essentially unregulated poetry websites, 
has spread to other, more stable, literary magazines and presses, and 
contributed to excess poetry inventories that have pushed down the 
value of responsible poems.”34 Bernstein wittily plays on his insider/
outsider status: as both an academic and a purveyor of avant-  garde 
poetry that, in effect, has no market value. Bernstein’s address is perhaps 
 V anguard T otal Index  161
at its most sincere when he suggests that “when the literary system 
works as it should, poetry and poetry assets flow to and from readers  
to create a productive part of the cultural field.”35 Bernstein’s playful 
polemic, though not altogether new, has additional resonance in the 
continuing midst of the Great Recession.
Dworkin, too, has invoked the rhetoric of economic crisis in relation 
to the glut of poetry, arguing that “poetry faces a Malthusian limit. Bound 
by discrepant rates of production and consumption, the readerly econ -
omy of poetry in the twenty-  first century cannot avoid a catastrophic 
calculus: the rate of consumption quickly hits an arithmetic limit (any 
one person can only read so much), but the rate of production is increas -
ing geometrically.”36 Like Bernstein, Dworkin advocates a broader field 
for poetry, recognizing that making poetry more “accessible” will do lit -
tle to attract readers as opposed to writers. Dworkin proposes a Franco 
Moretti–  inspired reorienting of poetry criticism: “Instead of attempting 
to account for individual books, the task would be to graph and model 
the complex poetic ecosystem itself, or to map data in ways that their 
composite assembly would reveal new information. Rather than look  
at discrete texts, criticism would turn to charting the relations among 
texts and visualizing those networks themselves.”37 This description 
could also serve as an overview of many of the concerns of a poetry that 
draws on the index form to offer a critique not only of existing systems 
of literary value, but of larger systems of economic and informational 
valuation. The index poem itself could be described as a “complex poetic 
ecosystem” that maps the ambient data of a society increasingly cen -
tered on the production and consumption of information.
T wo list poems anthologized in Against Expression , Charles Bern -
stein’s “My/My/My” and Alexandra Nemerov’s “First, My Motorola,” 
exemplify the increasingly commodified nature of everyday life. First 
published in 1975, Bernstein’s poem begins:
my pillow
my shirt
my house
my supper
my tooth
my money
my kite38
162 V anguard T otal Index
The simple structure of Bernstein’s poem points to the multiplicity of 
ways in which one can claim to possess something. The “my _______” 
format primarily lists objects, but also occasionally feelings and some -
times persons. There are no proper names in Bernstein’s poem. Pre -
sumably Bernstein has exercised authorial agency over the ordering of 
his list. Nemerov’s poem, by contrast, employs nearly the same struc -
ture, but lists only brand names in the order in which she encountered 
them throughout the course of a day:
First, my Motorola
Then my Frette
Then my Sonia Rykiel
Then my Bulgari
Then my Asprey
Then my Kohler39
The poem pursues this list for six pages and concludes once again with 
her Motorola. Bernstein’s and Nemerov’s work are list poems as opposed 
to wholly appropriated indexes, but both can be read as indexes of the 
frequency with which items or names appear. Nemerov’s poem reveals 
a great deal about her consumption habits in the aggregate. With nearly 
every brand name she mentions, we can infer a product; those infer -
ences cumulatively result in a kind of self-  portrait in a mirror of prod -
uct preference. T wo of the brand names that appear most frequently in 
Nemerov’s poem are Apple and Google. “First, My Motorola” is thus a 
one-  day “project of attention” that is a chronicle of product usage as well 
as a chronicle of information consumption.40
Among American poets of the post-  Language generation, T an Lin 
has perhaps devoted the most attention to the index as a poetic form. 
Lin describes his method as follows: “ In BlipSoak01 , my impulse was to 
initiate a random sampling technique or device that would transpire, as 
it were, within a time-  based composition, and that would seem ‘self-  
operating,’ i.e. a series of endlessly mutating literary styles no different 
form various surface effects, most notably the rhythms of a post-  capitalist 
marketplace marked by flexible accumulation and the replacement of 
durable goods with transitory information structures as the principal 
commodity, which are in turn indistinguishable from various authors: 
Riding, Spicer, Oppen, Rakosi, etc.”41 In juxtaposing the work of poets—  
 V anguard T otal Index  163
particularly poets hostile to capitalism such as the four he cites—  with 
the ambient data of corporate mass culture, Lin makes it difficult to 
source the information contained in his indexical poems. The effect, he 
suggests, is one of erasure, which mimics a larger cultural amnesia: “The 
aim of the work is to erase the database as an impenetrable impediment 
to the poetic and render the monumental inconsequential and relaxing, 
with the most relaxing data being those things that have already been 
forgotten in a culture that exists in order to be forgotten .”42 BlipSoak01  
relentlessly times itself—  offering down-  to- the- second measurements of 
the time of its articulation in its margins. It becomes difficult, and often 
impossible, to disentangle the separate sources and discursive forms 
found within Lin’s ambient writing.
In his more recent Seven Controlled Vocabularies and Obituary, 2004: 
The Joy of Cooking , Lin again returns to the index as a primary form—  
interspersing photographs, found text (which typically consists of “relax -
ing data”), and what are probably best described as short essays on vari -
ous aspects of mass culture. In a passage titled “ aMerIcaN StaNdard 
code  for INforMatIoN excha Nge,” Lin writes of the television show 
The Apprentice : “Rather than contemplate the working class, the contes -
t ants on The Apprentice  examine themselves, or more particularly, their 
fantasies about their working lives and the administered workspace—  
which is transformed into a TV game show. Or to put it in terms that 
both working viewer and working contestant can relate to: the ultimate 
fantasy island is the self-  mediated workspace with only one survivor—   
a boss introjected [as oneself ].”43 Lin alternates between passages of 
targeted ideology critique (such as the preceding) and more abstract 
meditations on the nature of poetry and books. Both reality TV and 
avant-  garde poetry, Lin implies, share a common basis in conforming  
to the informational channels of their time and context. Literary theory 
would seem to conform to yet another informational channel, as instanced 
by Lin’s borrowing of the complete index to Barthes’s Image–  Music–  
T ext . The “ aMerIcaN StaNdard code ,” though reductive in the ex-  
treme, cannot be bypassed. The ambient work, rather than attempting 
a direct attack on mass culture, attempts something of a sneak attack, 
camouflaging itself in standardized informatic patterns. It is metadata 
(a term played upon in the book’s cover design) that matters most in 
determining whether something is identified as art: “[T oday] a work of 
architecture [or film] or [poem] or [painting] or [novel] should have as 
164 V anguard T otal Index
fluid and standardized an Id [o Bject Id™ SySteM] as possible and 
function like a waiting area, time slot, universal market/currency or 
metadata standard [square brackets in original].”44 Lin offers a critique 
of consumer culture, but he does not suppose that poetry is immune 
from simplistic forms of classification such as those found in popular 
shows such as The Apprentice . The contestant who fantasizes of a “self-  
mediated workspace,” like the academic poet, partakes of the bureau -
cratic sublime. Self-  mediation of information or aesthetic value would 
seem to lead to an ideological impasse wherein the viewer or reader 
chooses sameness rather than difference. Invoking Stein’s T ender But -
tons, Lin writes, “Increasingly, goods and the information about those 
goods will come to mean one and the same thing. The difference is  
contracting.”45
Conceptual works featuring indexical forms often confront the stan -
dardization of consumption, as well as the standardization of knowl -
edge production.46 Rob Fitterman’s Sprawl : Metropolis 30a  operates as a 
metadata index of the Indian Mound Mall in Heath, Ohio, which 
Fitter  man connects to the Cahokia Mounds in Collinsville, Illinois.  
Fitterman appropriates the mall’s directory, which is overwhelmingly 
dominated by chain stores, and then proceeds to sample online cus -
tomer reviews for every store in the mall. Fitterman also includes a  
promotional statement for the mall that concludes by largely erasing 
the effects of European conquest on the landscape inhabited by Native 
Americans: “Despite its hard-  luck reputation, the Cahokia site feels 
immensely peaceful today. There’s no whiff of angst from an unsettled 
spirit world, no sense that anything awful happened here. So feel free to 
roam the grounds, bring your camera, and show the children the mys -
tery of the Native American Indians that they won’t soon forget!”47 
While such appropriation techniques carry with them a strong whiff of 
kitsch, they also often bring with them social critique—  of standardi -
zation, of suburbanization, and of hyperconsumerism. Appropriation 
strategies such as Fitterman’s are in some sense profoundly realist in 
that they accurately depict present realities with a minimum of autho -
rial interference. The poem “Directory,” for instance, which appeared  
in the special “Conceptual and Flarf ” section of Poetry  magazine, is an 
extremely straightforward index both of the mall’s constituent parts, as 
well as of the numbing experience of knowing in advance what products 
and services will be found in each:
 V anguard T otal Index  165
Macy’s
Circuit City
Payless Shoe Source
Sears
Kay Jeweler’s48
The poem (if it is a poem) is utterly banal, but that is its point. It  
mimics the rhythms of everyday life in a consumer society; it repro -
duces redundancy through wholesale serial copying.
Similarly emphasizing the effects of corporate homogenization, 
Rachel Zolf ’s Human Resources  deploys a complex blend of appropri -
ated texts in order to present a critique of management culture. While 
it follows no single constraint consistently, Human Resources  frequently 
makes use of word count and search query rankings—  often including 
Arabic numerals within its text. In the following passage, Q stands for 
search engine queries. Not surprisingly, profane and sexualized key -
words top the rankings, and yet political keywords (Bush, America, W ar) 
also appear: “Mass affluent consumers’ key satisfaction drivers aspira -
tional by most common queries of most-  common-  English-  words engine: 
fuck Q1 sex Q2 love the shit god i penis cunt a ass jesus dog Q13 pussy 
hate busy john me hello vagina america bitch cat dick you war yes.”49 
The language of personal investment figures prominently in Human 
Resources — interspersed with invocations of Bataillean general economy: 
“ Align this process as it evolves I want everything overlaid with Bataille’s 
catastrophes as cleansing acts, rebalancing the planet. Just like your port -
folio, tweaking the delicate equilibrium among asset mix, time horizon 
and risk tolerance.”50 The implied “you” in this passage would seem to 
be the individual worker/consumer/investor who is implicated in “the 
great risk shift.” Poetry, too, is involved in this total investment scheme: 
“Ensconced in the academy pleasuring in the beautiful excess of the 
unshackled referent, poetry can’t stock food banks, warm bodies or stop 
genocide from affecting my RSP .”51 An RSP , or Retirement Savings Plan, 
is the Canadian equivalent of an IRA, or Individual Retirement Account. 
Inverting the expected concern that her RSP’s investments will sanction 
genocide, Zolf worries grimly that genocide will adversely affect her own 
personal economic interests.
Zolf makes it difficult if not impossible to extract the language of the 
personal from the language of the corporate or even of the state. Human 
166 V anguard T otal Index
Resources  suggests the disturbing interconnectedness of institutions and 
individuals, and invokes the bureaucratic sublime to suggest that any -
one and anything can be reduced to a numerical equivalent. Of the use 
of numbers and numerology in Human Resources , Christian Bök has 
written, “These cryptograms based upon ‘word-  rank’  . . . call to mind 
index values or stock prices—  or perhaps (because of the Hebraic mys -
tique of gematria), the penal codes at Auschwitz; however, Zolf also 
suggests that, perhaps, poetry might constitute a kind of encryption 
that renders us ‘illegible’ to such capitalist mechanisms.”52 Bök’s reading 
is perhaps overly optimistic, given that Zolf casts doubt on the ability of 
“the unreadable [to] drive the reader from consuming to producing.”53 
Zolf implores us to “look through the mirror, it’s the Information Age,” 
suggesting that we can only see ourselves through information.54 Whereas 
the dominant mechanisms of capitalism force us to translate all aspects 
of our lives into numerical data, Zolf insists we do the opposite and 
translate quantities back into a language capable of bearing ethical con -
tent. There is little hope on Zolf ’s part, however, that re-  encryption in 
itself can effect social change.
Bill Kennedy and Darren W ershler-  Henry’s 2006 Apostrophe  like -
wise uses search engine results to depict the contemporary experience 
of drowning in data, interpolating its readers within the global catalog 
of the W orld Wide W eb. Playing on the notion of poetic apostrophe, 
the poem harnesses Internet search engines to create variations on 
phrases that take the form “you are ______.” So, for instance, a repre -
sentative section titled “(feeling quite overwhelmed you must say)” runs 
as follows: “you are a failure • you are able to divine how people are feel -
ing about you • you are continually on trial to prove that your opinions 
and actions are correct • you are not upset • you are finding this situa -
tion can go on for weeks, months or even years.”55 The reader cannot 
help but be exhausted by what are most often unflattering, if not aggres -
sive, apostrophes. Drawing on the nearly infinite textual reserves of the 
web, “you” can be almost anyone or anything. In an afterword, Kennedy 
and W ershler-  Henry write, “ As a figure of speech, apostrophe impli -
cates the reader in the production of excess information.”56 This excess 
information takes on the form of a catalog, which, like an index, is radi -
cally selective, but also potentially radically generative of associations: 
“The catalogue is a form that struggles with excess. Its job is to be re-  
ductive, to squeeze all of the possibilities that a world of information 
 V anguard T otal Index  167
has to offer into a definitive set—  not just the Greeks, but these Greeks. 
Its poetic effect, however, is the exact opposite. A catalogue opens up a 
poem to the threat of a surfeit of information, felt most keenly when  
the reader wonders, politely, ‘How long can this go on?’”57 The answer 
is of course dependent on the reader, and/or on what the reader con -
siders “a definitive set.” Like Raymond Queneau’s One Hundred Million 
Million Poems , the poem can easily outlast its reader’s ability to read it 
in a conventional manner.
Much of the work of Kenneth Goldsmith, perhaps the best known 
and most influential of conceptual writers using appropriation tech -
niques, can be read as indexical in its wholesale adoption of bureaucratic 
data. Day, a retyping of an entire day’s New Y ork Times , includes some 
two hundred pages of stock market quotes. Soliloquy , an exact record  
of every word spoken in a week by Goldsmith, includes many conver -
sations concerning the use of computers circa 1996 (Goldsmith at the 
time was operating a web design business). Darren W ershler-  Henry 
has written that “the weather in [Goldsmith’s] The Weather  serves as  
an index of the national mood.” Goldsmith’s current work-  in- progress, 
Capital , is a “rewrite” of W alter Benjamin’s Arcades Project  set in New 
Y ork City in the twentieth century.58
Goldsmith’s equation of poetry with “managing language in the digi-
tal age” presents many critical conundrums.59 Although a work such as 
Soliloquy  could be described as “oblique autobiography,” what are we to 
make of a project like Day, the content of which is entirely predeter -
mined?60 Consider, for instance, the following passages (I am quoting a 
large chunk in part because of Goldsmith’s insistence on the chunki -
ness, so to speak, of conceptual appropriation):
how a Mazo N uSeS INforMatIoN Amazon.com, the No. 1 Internet 
retailer, has revised its privacy policy, and in doing so has provided a win -
dow into how much it uses the customer data it collects to help it and 
other companies sell more. In the new policy, Amazon has disclosed that it 
has started sending e-  mail marketing messages on behalf of other compa -
nies. It also added to a long list of data it collects about users, including 
financial information, Social Security numbers, product searches and the 
telephone number from which a user calls Amazon’s customer service line. 
And for the first time, Amazon disclosed it can buy information about 
customers from outside databases. And if the new initiatives do not help 
168 V anguard T otal Index
stem Amazo n’s huge losses and the company is put up for sale, the new 
policy says, anyone who buys Amazon will get its customer data.61
There would seem to be little need here to worry much about what  
the New Critics called “the biographical fallacy” (the excessive reading 
of biography into a literary work), since Goldsmith gives no indication 
that this passage is any more or less interesting than the hundreds of 
other pages in either direction. This can only be “news that stays news” 
if a reader (or a community of readers) finds some kind of significance 
in it. In a sense, the material of Day is a journalistic cross-  section of 
material that hasn’t been processed into history worth remembering. 
While some newspaper readers may feel like they read the entire paper 
on a given day, in fact they read in a highly selective manner. Some of 
the oddest sections in Day are the pages of stock quotes (the New Y ork 
Times  stopped printing such material in 2006). Consider this uncannily 
Steinian moment, which seems as if it might have been drawn from an 
alternate version of “Patriarchal Poetry”:
Baxter 1.16 1..4 35 15587 85.63 82.13 83.25–  1.50 16.94 6.56 BayView .40 4.1 
14 4W 9.94 9.38 9.75+0.25
Continued on Next Page
The same way my father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
The same way his father made it.
Belvedere
vodka
IMPorted62
The most obvious variable in Goldsmith’s retyping is the move from 
newspaper page to book page—  in which Goldsmith tends to ignore 
most, but not all, of the paper’s original formatting. Goldsmith could 
have lineated this page very differently without doing anything more 
 V anguard T otal Index  169
than merely retyping. The stock quotes, no longer in neatly ordered  
columns, devolve into seemingly arbitrary strings of numbers. An ad-  
vertisement, such as the one for Belvedere V odka, would typically be set 
off from the main columns of news. Day’s reduction of the entire paper 
to a single typeface and a uniform prose formatting foregrounds the 
textual disconnect of a vodka ad placed in the midst of a page of what 
are in effect obsolete prices.
In a short essay that serves as a kind of manifesto for Day, Goldsmith 
writes, “I’m interested in a valueless practice. Nothing has less value 
than yesterday’s news (in this case yesterday’s newspaper—  what could 
be of less value, say, than stock quotes from September 1, 2000?).”63 
Elsewhere, however, Goldsmith has given strong indications that his 
practice is not “valueless.” In “The Day” (not to be confused with Day), 
for instance, which was printed in a special conceptual section of Poetry  
magazine edited by Goldsmith, he chose two brief selections from the 
September 11, 2001, New Y ork Times . By a strange process of recircula -
tion, the Times  even reprinted one of those poems, “Metropolitan Fore -
cast” (the title is self-  explanatory), on the ten-  year anniversary of the 
9/11 attacks, crediting the poem to Goldsmith and ambiguously noting 
that the poem had appeared in Poetry  magazine, although presumably 
the Times  remained the copyright holder. Paired with Goldsmith’s poem 
in the Times  on the ten-  year anniversary was a more conventional arti -
cle from November 2001 describing the unseasonably warm autumn.64 
In effect, the Times  was (re)appropriating its own content.
Goldsmith’s other poem for “The Day” further reveals him struggling 
to conduct a valueless practice (again I quote a large chunk):
Islam
e2 the New york t IMeS, tue Sday, SePteMBer 11, 2001 art S 
aBroad
Continued From First Arts Page
On Islam, Mr. Houellebecq went still further, deriding his estranged 
mother for converting to Islam and proclaiming that, while all mono -
theistic religions were “cretinous,” “the most stupid religion is Islam.” 
And he added: “When you read the Koran, you give up. At least the 
Bible is
Sexual tou rism
170 V anguard T otal Index
and inflamma tory
remarks about
Palestinians.
very beautiful because Jews have an extraordinary literary talent.” And 
later, noting that “Islam is a dangerous religion,” he said it was condemned 
to disappear, not only because God does not exist but because it was 
being undermined by capitalism.65
The words at the center of the selection, set off from the main text and 
lineated like verse, are not Houellebecq’s. The article in question does 
mention that Houellebecq’s recent novel features a sexual tourist as  
its protagonist—  but nowhere do the words “inflammatory / remarks 
about / Palestinians” appear in the text of the original article.66 Gold -
smith’s interjection puts Houellebecq’s xenophobia into even sharper 
relief—  the very act of selecting this passage demonstrates that Gold -
smith’s aims, even if they are primarily ironic or parodic, are not free of 
value judgments.
Though Goldsmith’s writings have attracted considerable attention, 
perhaps his most influential accomplishment has been his role in the 
creation of Ub uWeb , arguably the world’s largest online archive of avant-  
garde writing, music, and film.67 Ub uWeb  exemplifies what the concep -
tual artist Seth Price has termed the phenomenon of “dispersion” during 
“the last few decades of global corporate sprawl.”68 According to Price, 
“Distributed media can be defined as social information circulating  
in theoretically unlimited quantities in the common market, stored or 
accessed via portable devices.”69 Price’s description has much in com -
mon with descriptions of the goals of the relational aesthetics move -
ment in aspiring to a more democratic system of circulation.70 Price’s 
most extensive work of conceptual writing, How to Disappear in Amer -
ica, takes the form of an ambivalent handbook on said topic. Largely 
appropriated from a single online source, the book indulges fantasies  
of escape only to relentlessly demonstrate how difficult it in fact would 
be to step outside the bureaucratic oversight of contemporary society. 
How to Disappear in America  presents a paranoid vision of a world in 
which our every action leaves some trace of our presence.
Price’s How to Disappear in America  foregrounds the disappearance 
of its author in complex ways. Price acknowledges that the book is 
 V anguard T otal Index  171
mostly appropriated, but he also claims to have spent considerable time 
editing and writing it. Price rearranges and adds to his main source, an 
online text available at SkepticT ank.org. The complexities do not end 
there: in 2006, the German artist Susanne Bürner published substan -
tially the same source text(s) under the title Vanishing Point: How to 
Disappear in America Without a Trace .71 Both Price’s and Bürner’s texts 
are distributed by the New Y ork–  based Printed Matter, although I can 
find no other institutional relationship between the two works. Bürner’s 
version predates Price’s, but the two artists seem to have been inde -
pendently attracted to the same source. When I asked a salesperson at 
Printed Matter about the relation between the two books, she replied, 
“That’s the trouble with appropriation,” implying that it made little dif -
ference if appropriation artists independently drew on the same texts. 
In another sense, however, the troubling fluidity of (re)appropriation 
could be part of the point: the writer/artist is dispersed into an amor -
phous, ahistorical mass of textuality. Fascinatingly, the original author of 
the text, Fredric Rice, has accused Seth Price of violating his copyright 
(Rice does not seem to be aware of the earlier Bürner text).72 Accord-  
ing to Rice, his work is to be used for noncommercial purposes only. 
Ironically, then, Price’s appropriation has commercialized (under the 
copyright imprimatur of the Leopard Press) what was before a univer -
sally available free online work. Rice’s original intention, so far as I can 
tell, was to write an imaginative how-  to guide for people trying to escape 
cults or abusive relationships. When reframed by Price and Bürner, 
much of Rice’s deliberately cartoonish writing comes off as more para -
noid and delusional than it in fact is.
Importantly, all three incarnations of the How to Disappear in Amer -
ica text conclude with an eloquent court ruling written by Montana State 
Supreme Court Justice James C. Nelson. Like other recent conceptual 
works such as Christian Bök’s Xenotext Experiment , Sarah Jacobs’s Deci-
phering Human Chromosome 16: Index to the Report , and Kim Rosen -
field’s re: evolution , the How to Disappear  text is particularly focused on 
issues of bioinformatics (the storage, retrieval, and interpretation of bio -
logical data).73 Justice Nelson’s ruling contains the following statement:
W e are a throw-  away society. My garbage contains the remains of what  
I eat and drink. It may contain discarded credit card receipts along with 
172 V anguard T otal Index
yesterday’s newspaper and junk mail. It might hold some personal letters, 
bills, receipts, vouchers, medical records, photographs and stuff that is 
imprinted with the multitude of assigned numbers that allow me access to 
the global economy and vice versa.
My garbage can contains my DNA.74
Despite his concern, the judge ruled that evidence collected from a sus -
pect’s trash was not eligible for Fourth Amendment protection. The 
irony then in concluding with this ruling is that it stands as a futile cri -
tique of the system of criminal data collection. The text seems to be say -
ing, in effect, that there is no way to disappear in America, no way to step 
outside the total index of governmental and corporate data systems.
Matthew Timmons’s Credit  (2009) similarly engages the inescapabil -
ity of data collection systems.75 Praised by Craig Dworkin and V anessa 
Place, Credit  consists of eight hundred pages of financial documents 
addressed to its author. Credit  so far exists only in three copies, and  
its author notes that he himself is not able to afford its $199 cost on the 
print-  on- demand site Lulu.com. Since I, too, am unable to access or 
afford this book, I will quote from Dworkin’s description: “Document -
ing the social and economic space defined by the writing that falls 
between bulk mailing and fine print (full color and some of it very fine 
indeed), cred It appropriates direct mail credit card solicitations and 
advertisements in order to explore the nature of disclosure in a series of 
plays between display and censorship, see-  thru windows and security 
envelopes, financial promise and legal threat.  . . . T esting the limits of 
publishing—  cred It is the largest and most expensive book publish -
able via Lulu—  Timmons’ book is well beyond most readers’ means.”76 
Although much of the personal information is redacted, Credit  none -
theless would seem to reveal much about how individual borrowers are 
interpolated by a system of massive redundancy. Despite (or perhaps 
because of!) his credit woes, Timmons, according to V anessa Place, re-  
ceived twenty-  six credit card offers within a span of three weeks. There 
would seem to be little hope that even the most vigilant consumer could 
ever wholly resist, ignore, or understand such a fantastically complex 
array of financial opportunities and risks. The bourgeois investor may 
contemplate the ethics of his or her retirement investments; the indebted 
consumer is forced to trust corporations whose fine print cannot pos -
sibly be comprehended.
 V anguard T otal Index  173
Perhaps the most troubling conceptual inventory yet to appear is 
V anessa Place’s Statement of Facts . First published on Ub uWeb  and now 
available as a Lulu.com volume released under the imprint of Blanc Press, 
Statement of Facts  reproduces legal documents (with names redacted) 
obtained by Place, who is a criminal appellate attorney specializing in 
the defense of sexual offenders. Statement of Facts  is the first of a three-  
part trilogy called Tragodía ; two further installments, Statement of the 
Case  and Argument , are forthcoming. The Blanc Press version of State -
ment of Facts  mimics the appearance of the Princeton University Press 
Charles Singleton translation of The Divine Comedy — but there is no 
redemption ( purgatorio ) or transcendence ( paradiso ) within Place’s tragic 
epic of suffering, guilt, and violence. Statement of Facts  showcases the 
Rashomon-  like effects of conflicting testimony, and makes its readers 
question the factuality of criminal documents—  opening a window on 
to the bureaucratic mechanisms of the criminal justice system.
Despite Place not having written a word of the 430 pages of State -
ment of Facts , the perspective of the author can hardly be neutral, given 
that Place has written extensively on rape law in her critical book The 
Guilt Project: Rape, Morality, and Law . Both The Guilt Project  and State -
ment of Facts  make for extremely difficult reading. While Statement of 
Facts  purports to passively index court documents, The Guilt Project  
offers a sophisticated and well-  argued account of the hypocrisies and 
injustices of contemporary rape law. Place does not mount a compre -
hensive socioeconomic critique in The Guilt Project , but she does repeat -
edly emphasize that poverty contributes greatly to the justice system’s 
fundamental lack of fairness. From the perspective of issues having to 
do with information classification and data excess, Statement of Facts  
could be taken to suggest that no amount of documentation will neces -
sarily give us an objective account of disputed events. It is not possible 
to evaluate Place’s provocative claims here; however, I would note that 
The Guilt Project  insists on the culpability of society as a whole. Place 
emphasizes that contemporary media culture plays a role in shaping 
notions of guilt and innocence, and she foregrounds her own role within 
the system: “There’s no getting out from under the calloused thumb, 
because in today’s W estern world, even artists abrogate their artistic 
identity, and authors their authority, and it’s all big business, or big busi -
ness writ small, for even indie’s corporate-  lite, and where there once was 
a thirst for culture, now there’s not much left but a gag effect.  . . . I work 
174 V anguard T otal Index
for the guilty. I am guilty.”77 Place’s rhetoric is extreme, and her prog  nosis 
bleak. The conditions she describes, importantly, take place in a world 
where “we live engulfed in images, and there is no transcendence.”78
The works described so far in this chapter (with the possible excep -
tion of Bernstein’s “My/My/My”) passively index in whole or in part an 
existing data set. By contrast, a poem such as Paul Violi’s “Index” actively 
indexes a fictional biography.79 First published in Harper’s  in 1982, the 
poem has no direct link to the famous “Harper’s Index,” which was in-  
troduced in 1984. Violi’s “Index” is a chronology of the life of a fictional 
painter named Sutej Hudney, which begins at childhood and ends with 
“last words.” The poem performs an intriguing retrospective indexing, 
but it is distinctly “un-  conceptual” by comparison to the writing of Lin, 
Place, or Goldsmith. Violi’s poem is arguably more a work of short fiction 
than one of appropriation—  interested more in an ironic displacement 
of the self than in a critique of information or classification systems.
Thanks in some measure to the promotional tactics of its practi -
tioners, conceptual writing has too often been read as a literature of 
exhaustion rather than as a literature of engagement. While exhaustion 
may indeed be a goal of conceptual writing (which Place and Fitterman 
describe in terms of an allegory of failure), it can also be the case that 
many of the works just described can be placed in a realist, or even 
socialist realist, tradition.80 The works described above conform well to 
Mitchell Whitelaw’s description of indexical data art. Whitelaw describes 
recent works which “construct a notion of data—  of its capacities, quali -
ties, and significance—  in the ways that they use it. Data is here first of all 
indexical of reality. These works gather existing data from the network, 
drawing together thousands of elements that are already, unproblem -
atically, ‘out there.’ This reinforces the sense of collapsed indexicality; 
these data points have causes (authors) of their own that in some sense 
guarantee their connection to reality, or at least defer the question of 
connection.”81 Rather than post-  individualist cross-  sections of random 
data, works of conceptual writing can be read as realistic depictions of 
how “we spend our lives engaged with data systems.”82 W e are data; data 
is us—  whether in terms of bioinformatics or in terms of the bureau -
cratic sublime’s fusion of the personal and the corporate, or the personal 
and the academic. As Derek Beaulieu writes, “The Internet is not some -
thing that challenges who we are or how we write, it is who we are and 
how we write.”83 Whitelaw suggests that one of the goals of data art is 
 V anguard T otal Index  175
the construction of a new “data subjectivity.” Conceptual writing helps 
us counter the myth of the anarchic Internet, of the self-  created digital 
subject, of the poet as a figure of retreat to a time before the information 
society. By a seeming paradox, conceptual writing may be the most cre -
ative, most technologically aware writing now being found, generated, 
and lost in the vastness of electronic textuality. Artists and writers can 
no more easily chose to opt out of the information society than they can 
chose the era in which they live. For the generation of poets that came 
of age in the 1990s and 2000s, data excess is a fundamental precondi -
tion for new (and recycled) writing. As Price puts it kitschily in Disper -
sion, “With more and more media readily available through this unruly 
archive [the Internet], the task becomes one of packaging, producing, 
reframing, and distributing; a mode of production analogous not to the 
creation of material goods, but to the production of social contexts, 
using existing material. Anything on the internet is a fragment, provi -
sional, pointing elsewhere. Nothing is finished. What a time you chose 
to be born!”84
This page intentionally left blank 
177AFTERWORD
“ PROLIFERATING  
RAW DATA”
ROBERT GRENIER IN THE EXPANDED 
FIELD OF NEW MEDIA POETICS
T echnē belongs to bringing-  forth, to poiēsis; it is something poietic.
— Martin Heidegger, “The Question Concerning T echnology”
When you work on the computer, you work inside the prison house of 
the language of the computer. And it’s endlessly fascinating and is 
opening up new vistas all the time, but you never get beyond the 
immediate relation with the machine.
— Robert Grenier, in conversation with Ramsey Scott
Only in the past few years has the poet Robert Grenier owned a 
computer.1 Since the late 1980s, the bulk of his work has taken the 
form of poems drawn by hand. One of the few typed poems in the 1991 
collection What I Believe: Transpirations/Transpiring: Minnesota  reads:
C O M P U T E R
c o m p
u t e r
w i t o
r a t e ? ?
*
c o m p
u t e r
l i t e
w h a t ?
?2
178 Afterword
The poem would seem something of a dubious nonresponse to the 
seemingly benign question, Are you computer literate? But the poem 
deserves closer attention. The poem depends on mono-  spaced type 
(largely made obsolete by the word processor) to achieve its four-  letter-  
per- line symmetry on the page. Highly conscious of its appearance on 
the page, the poem ends with a handwritten question mark. The word 
“computer” is never misspelled, but presumably “literate” is misspelled 
twice, introducing the possibility of several puns within the lineation of 
the words (or parts of compound words) “rate” and “lite.” Could the poem 
be spoken in an Elmer Fudd voice? Or could this even be the voice of 
Randolph Dud, the self-  deprecatory figure who elicited Grenier’s 1971 
pronouncement “ I hate SPeech ,” which Ron Silliman and others have 
cited as the inaugural slogan of Language writing? Considering that 
Grenier was primarily mounting a tongue-  in- cheek critique of “voice-  
based” poetics, it might be overreaching to read too much into the per -
sona of R. Dud. On the one hand, “ c o M P u t e r ” could be read as a 
protest against the introduction of the word processor—  especially 
given that Grenier’s poems have consistently been extraordinarily self-  
conscious of their hand-   and typewritten materiality on the page. On 
the other hand, perhaps the poem is suggesting that to resist computer -
ization is to be a dud.
On occasion I have envisioned an updated version of Randolph Dud 
writing “ I hate Scree NS”— a sentiment (albeit typically delivered in 
less emphatic terms) that I hear routinely from students and colleagues. 
There is a greater abundance of poetry readily accessible than ever before, 
and yet I find it unappealing to read poetry on my laptop or on an 
e- reader, despite the fact that I use both regularly. Many of Grenier’s 
1970s and 1980s poems seem almost to require the characteristic look 
and feel of the IBM Selectric’s Courier font. T o publish poetry now in 
Courier would perhaps seem affected or nostalgic—  yet it is difficult to 
imagine Grenier’s Phantom Anthems  (1986) or A Day at the Beach  (1984) 
in any other typeface.3
One poem in particular from A Day at the Beach  epitomizes the 
issues raised in this book. The poem is part of a sequence, and its  
meaning is intimately related to its presentation, and so I reproduce  
the page spread in full (Figure 16). A Day at the Beach  is divided into 
three sections: morning, midday, and evening. Each page of the book is 
 Afterword  179
correspondingly divided into three parts. The book’s frontispiece and 
endsheet feature photographs of the poet writing the word “sand” in 
sand. The poem (or section of the sequence) most relevant to my dis -
cussion here reads:
 PRO lifERaTing Raw daTa
 rising level of generalization
abandoned object actually except as example
In some sense, the poem could stand in for the entire project of trying 
to create a one-  to- one correspondence between the book of poems and 
the experience of being at the beach. The book is replete with mundane 
details of going to the beach—  from sand lice to pelicans—  and is radi -
cally episodic and spare in its details. The aggregate data of the poems 
(literally letter by letter and word by word) proliferates, without neces -
sarily taking the form of a conventional lyric of self-  discovery. Though 
located at the locus classicus  of the liminal (or littoral) poem, the seaside, 
the book does not operate along the lines of the traditional romantic 
lyric. A Day at the Beach  does not build to a crisis or denouement. There 
is no speaker who suggests that there is a “rising level of generalization,” 
and follows this with “abandoned object actually except as example.” Nor 
are there definite or indefinite articles to introduce these statements. W e 
are seemingly reading the equivalent of field notes. The poet seems con -
tent to let raw data speak for itself.
But raw data does not speak for itself, and Grenier’s spatialization  
of the poems on the page does much to contribute to their meaning.4 
The poet himself has written that in “ A Day at the Beach , set of six 
things on a page where two ‘columns’ stacked 3-  each, everywhichway, 
maintain [ sic] a ‘story-  line’ in various directions—  ‘purely the possible’—  
while maintaining a sturdy ‘narrative line’ throughout, leaning on the 
top-  to- bottom/left to right ‘development’ of the ‘thrice-  told’ seventy-  
two frames.  . . . Written or not, the sledgehammer contemplation of 
things with clumsy orders of verbiage—  & printing of same, if that 
route, impressing paper—  is a furious, fortuitous, foolish & noble act.”5 
In equating narrative and attention, Grenier seemingly de-  emphasizes 
the importance of plot, instead emphasizing the role of the media by 
Figure 16.  Robert Grenier, from A Day at the Beach  (1984).
182 Afterword
and through which the poem is conveyed, as well as emphasizing the 
role of sense perception (or immediate cognition) in the production 
and reception of the poem. Time of day becomes the narrative structure 
of the sequence. For Grenier, “ All writing is essentially ‘narrative’—  not 
only storytelling/prose—  but any combination of letters, that moves in 
time.”6 In Grenier’s own terms, A Day at the Beach  is a multidirectional 
narrative, highly conscious of the mediation between the poet’s thoughts 
and experiences and their ultimate “realization” on paper. Elsewhere 
Grenier has written of his handwritten poems, “The graphic  qualities 
have no interest in themselves.”7 The goal, rather than to produce an 
aesthetically pleasing work of visual art, is to undertake a “conjuring act, 
groping toward phenomena with the apparatus of the hands making 
marks + entirely preoccupied w/moving fingers—  as if that participated 
in the W orld At Large  in some direct  way that was both significant to it/
called forth by it.”8 This quote, it should be noted, is transcribed from  
a handwritten essay. Grenier takes the verb “to draw” literally in the 
sense of sketching, but also in the sense of drawing forth the most basic 
units of language itself, the very shapes of letters. At an even more basic 
level, Grenier draws attention to the individual lines that make up letter -
forms. Like Blake’s illuminated books, Grenier’s poetry over the past 
two decades rejects typographic representation in favor of hand-  drawn 
letters. Grenier is, in some ways, a font unto himself, sacrificing conven -
tional legibility in the interests of a gestural, embodied script.
Barrett W atten (importantly Grenier’s co-  editor of the journal This , 
in which the famous “ I hate SPeech ” proclamation first appeared) has 
recently argued that emergent media technologies should lead us to con-  
sider “poetics in an expanded field.” Grenier’s writing, which has appeared 
in many media formats—  letterpress, offset, poster, handwriting, inter -
views, index cards, JavaScript, e-  mail, Giclée prints, and even sand—  is 
an exemplary case of such a poetics in an expanded field. Tim W ood 
writes that “Grenier’s poetry isn’t nostalgic nor is it the work of a lud -
dite.  . . . Grenier’s poetry proleptically embraces recent technological 
advances, anticipating a future that has now arrived.”9
The beach would traditionally be considered among the most poetic 
and least mediated of all locations: its very sublimity overwhelms medi -
ation, requiring a different kind of attention to data. By focusing on  
the smallest possible units of meaning, A Day at the Beach  operates  
as an interface between the human and the natural landscape, between 
meaning-  making and raw sense-  data—  as well as between poet and 
 Afterword  183
reader. For Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker, “data does not 
come into being fully formed and whole but instead is inflected with 
shape as the result of specific social and technical processes. Interface is 
how dissimilar data forms interoperate.”10 One of the index cards from 
Grenier’s Sentences  reads in its entirety:
i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e11
Grenier’s portmanteau could suggest that it is one card between ( inter ) 
other similarly sized poem works ( opera ) meant to optimize a fluid 
nonsequential interaction between writer and reader. This single-  word 
poem, like much of Grenier’s writing, pushes the boundaries of what is 
recognizable as poetry—  it attempts to be what it says  by interoperating 
on its readers. It can be read either in its original context within a box  
of five hundred five-  by- eight index cards (Figure 17), or in its later web-  
based JavaScript incarnation (Figure 18), in which the order of the cards 
is randomized.
The word “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e” is also located conspicuously 
near the center of Grenier’s poster poem CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  (Figure 19), 
Figure 17.  Robert Grenier, “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e,” from Sentences  (1978).
184 Afterword
which includes approximately 275 poems, some selected from Sentences .12 
The word is thus literally shared between two (or arguably three) of 
Grenier’s works. Printed by Lyn Hejinian’s T uumba Press in 1979, the 
poster poem (Figure 20) is described in a contemporaneous brochure 
from the press as “a mind’s eye view of Cambridge, Mass. & environs.” 
Grenier denies that there is any inherent order to the spatialization of 
the poems on the poster, but he also describes the work “as a rough and 
subjective map of the Boston area, centered on Cambridge, spreading 
out in the topography of memory.  . . . The black of the right margin 
would be the Atlantic Ocean, and the middle of the black edge at the 
top Ipswich Bay, Cape Ann the upper right and Connecticut the lower 
left—  a map of mental relations.”13 In her important early essay “The 
Rejection of Closure,” Hejinian pairs CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  with Bruce 
Andrews’s “Love Songs,” and categorizes both as
“Field work,” where words and lines are distributed irregularly on the 
page  . . . in which the order of the reading is not imposed in advance. Any 
Figure 18.  “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e,” from Sentences  (2003 web version, 
written in JavaScript, viewed on an iPad 2 in Safari browser).
 Afterword  185
reading of these works is an improvisation; one moves through the work 
not in straight lines but in curves, swirls, and across intersections, to words 
that catch the eye or attract attention repeatedly.14
I would add to this that CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  is not only a subjective 
poem–  map drawn from memory, it is also an information-  rich visual 
work that makes strong demands on the reader/viewer. Each word, 
phrase, or sentence is, so to speak, inseparable from the “mass” of text 
that surrounds it. The word “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e,” for instance, 
might allude to Louis Zukofsky’s emphasis on optics  in his definition of 
objectivism—  especially as Zukofsky’s definition is alluded to elsewhere 
in the poster.15 The word “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e” might also refer 
obliquely to the opening chapter of Harvard professor F . O. Matthies -
sen’s American Renaissance , which is titled (after Whitman) “In the 
Optative Mood.” This one neologism is polyvalent in its associations—  
and its different print and electronic contexts only add to its allusive 
complexity.
Grenier’s poetry, like that of his contemporary Aram Saroyan, is often 
categorized as minimalist (a term Grenier disavows). On their own, 
Grenier’s poems may be minimalistic, but in the aggregate they are any -
thing but—  they revel in a non-  serial simultaneity. There can be no sin -
gular focal point to CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS , just as there can be no consistent 
sequence to Sentences.  CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  overloads the reader with de-  
tails of everyday life—  much as the modern city-  dweller (e.g., Leopold 
Bloom) is continually exposed to a barrage of textuality in the form of 
signage, much of which only serves to constitute an ambient background 
to everyday life. A map, especially one drawn from memory, is always 
perspectival and always mediated. Grenier’s poems typically emerge from 
the simplest of production techniques and media, and yet in that very 
simplicity they continually refer back to the forms of mediation (type, 
codex, pen, screen, scanning) that make them possible in their final 
incarnations. Liz Kotz suggests in her reading of the relation of text and 
image in conceptual art that “1960s artists recurrent obsession with the 
most minimal, redundant, and empty of messages can be seen as an 
effort to foreground the channels of transmission and the conditions of 
reception in  . . . new communications media.”16 Craig Dworkin makes a 
similar case in his recent No Medium , in which he argues that media 
“consist of analyses of networked objects in specific social settings,” and 
Figure 19.  Robert Grenier, detail from CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  (1979).
 Afterword  187
“are not merely storage mechanisms somehow independent of the acts 
of reading or recognizing the signs they record.”17
Speaking of his close friend Larry Eigner, Grenier insists on the cen -
trality of the typewriter and of various media forms to Eigner’s poet-  
ics: “It’s tempting to think of [Eigner] as one of the very first (almost 
‘interactive,’ since the U.S. Mail came fairly quickly, not like letters in  
the 19th century) ‘Virtual Reality’ American persons—  ‘all by them -
selves,’ yet bound up intimately and actively (in their minds), in very 
Figure 20.  Robert Grenier, full view of CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  (1979).
188 Afterword
significant ‘contact’ with other persons ‘on screen’ (PBS television and 
otherwise, continuingly, FM radio—  what he heard and saw via these 
media was an element of ‘what there was’/probably extraordinarily  
‘real,’ for him, to which he often ‘reacted’ in his poems.”18 Grenier’s criti-
cal prose, like his poetry, insists on an im media cy of communication. 
According to Grenier, Eigner’s physical limitations are an advantage in 
terms of his ability to experience more fully a world increasingly medi -
ated by radio, television, and computers. Grenier’s poetry, like Eigner’s, 
is interactive without the use of a digital interface—  or rather his poetry 
is “i n t e r o p e r o p t a t a t i v e.” Mark Hansen has recently claimed 
that “mediation forms the very basis of human existence. Human beings 
literally exist in the mediation of the world, which is to say, in a medium 
that has always been technical.”19 Grenier’s writing helps us see that 
poetry as a medium, no less than any other literary genre, continues to 
have an important role to play in a world of proliferating raw data—  
both on-  screen and off.
189ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
It was my good fortune to have Ursula Heise as my dissertation adviser, 
as I first encountered many of the themes of this book in her Poetry/
T echnology graduate seminar. The other members of my dissertation 
committee—  Michael Golston, Brent Hayes Edwards, Bruce Andrews, 
and Lytle Shaw—  also deserve special thanks. Michael Golston has 
taught me more about poetry and poetics than anyone else—  his schol -
arly generosity is beyond compare. Craig Dworkin has been a central 
influence on my work; his comments on this project in its early stages 
were crucial to its genesis. Bruce Andrews kindly discussed his work 
with me on multiple occasions. I did not know either T an Lin or Robert 
Grenier when I set out to write about their work, but both have since 
become good friends, and I thank them for their commentary.
At Bard College, I had the exceptional luck to have Robert Kelly, Ann 
Lauterbach, Joan Retallack, and Michael Ives as colleagues. Michael 
Ives in particular has been a key interlocutor, tirelessly commenting on 
my works in progress.
Much of this book was written under the auspices of a junior/post -
doctoral fellowship at the Fox Center for Humanistic Inquiry at Emory 
University. While at Emory, Benji Kahan read and commented on much 
of my work. Michael Moon, James Mulholland, and Christina Hanhardt 
offered instructive criticism on an early version of chapter 6.
Craig Saper and Michael North kindly responded to my Bob Brown 
queries. Phoebe Brown, Christopher Perry Brown, and Rory Brown 
generously discussed Brown with me in person. Parts of this book were 
presented as papers at the Columbia/Penn Poetics Conference, the 
American Comparative Literature Association Conference, the Society 
190 Acknowledgments
for T extual Studies Conference, the Modernist Studies Association Con -
ference, and the Bruce Andrews Symposium at Fordham University. 
Library research was conducted at UCLA Special Collections, Emory 
University’s Danowski Archive, the Beinecke Library at Y ale, the Berg 
Collection at the New Y ork Public Library, the Fales Collection at NYU, 
the Charles Olson Research Collection at the University of Connecti -
cut, Stanford University Special Collections, and the Columbia Univer -
sity Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
The following is a partial list of those who commented on the book 
at various stages: Ondrea Ackerman, Michael Aird, Chris Alexander, 
Andrea Andersson, Doug Armato, Melissa W atterworth Batt, Paul 
Benzon, Charles Bernstein, Jen Bervin, Sebastian Campos, Sarah Cole, 
Seamus Cowan, Kenneth Crews, Douglas Davey, Katherine Finkelstein, 
Robert Fitterman, David Foote, Kristen Gallagher, Michael Gallagher, 
Drew Gardner, Kenneth Goldsmith, Alicia Gomez, Robert Grenier, 
Emily Hamilton, Cole Heinowitz, Lyn Hejinian, Ryan Howe, Danielle 
Kasprzak, Charley Lanning, T an Lin, Trisha Low, Alan Lucey, Simon 
Morris, Karla Nielsen, Justin Parks, Bergen Pierson, Alexander Provan, 
Jean-  Michel Rabaté, Natalie Robehmed, Kim Rosenfield, Judah Rubin, 
Athena Ryno, Matthew Sandler, Andrew Shurtz, Danny Snelson,  
Stefanie Sobelle, Carol Stephens, Mike Stoffel, Dennis T enen, Nick 
Thurston, Jenelle Troxell, Sam Truitt, Eugene Vydrin, Charles W alls, 
Erin W arholm, Robert W eston, Tim W ood.
Forsyth Harmon deserves an honorary Ph.D. for all the editing she 
did on this project.
If I hadn’t already dedicated my dissertation to my mother, Sarah 
Stephens, this book would be dedicated to her.
191NOTES
Preface
 1. According to P elle Snickars and Patrick V onderau, the pocket phone was in 
fact first proposed not long after the original Bloomsday: “The American jour -
nalist Robert Thompson Sloss (1872–  1920) in 1908 envisioned the future of 
mobile media in his contribution to the German book Die Welt in hundert 
Jahren . Over a century before the iPhone was launched, Sloss rightly predicted 
the advent of a ‘wireless century’ marked by the availability of  ‘pocket phones’  
that would allow instant and worldwide connections between individuals or 
even groups, for personal conversations from the North Pole as much as for con -
ference calls to New Y ork City; for transmitting sounds and music, moving 
images and written documents; and even for making bank payments.” Pelle 
Snickars and Patrick V onderau, eds., Moving Data: The iPhone and the Future of 
Media  (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2012), 5.
 2. Some objects in Bloom’s pocket, such as money, are implied but not specifi -
cally recorded. Bloom’s budget for June 16, for instance, is revealed in the “Ithaca” 
chapter (17.1455ff.). James Joyce, Ulysses , ed. Hans W alter Gabler (New Y ork: 
Vintage, 1986), 584.
 3. T om Standage, The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the T elegraph 
and the Nineteenth Century’s Online Pioneers  (New Y ork: W alker, 1998), 102.
 4. F. T. Marinetti, Critical Writings , ed. Günter Berghaus and trans. Doug 
Thompson (New Y ork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2006), 14. For a critique of 
the claim that information and communications technologies result in the “death 
of distance,” see Vincent Mosco, “Loose Ends: The Death of Distance, the End 
of Politics,” in The Digital Sublime: Myth, Power, and Cyberspace  (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2004), 85–  116. Leo Marx notes that the metaphor of the 
annihilation of space and time predates the Industrial Revolution: “No stock 
phrase in the entire lexicon of progress appears more often than ‘the annihilation 
of space and time,’ borrowed from one of Pope’s relatively obscure poems (‘Y e 
192 Notes to Preface
Gods! annihilate but space and time  . . .’).” The Machine in the Garden: T echnol -
ogy and the Pastoral Ideal in America  (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1964), 
194. The metaphor is particularly resonant in Karl Marx’s Grundrisse , which 
argues that “capital by its nature drives beyond every spatial barrier. Thus the 
creation of the physical conditions of exchange—  of the means of communica -
tion and transport—  the annihilation of space by time—  becomes an extraordi -
nary necessity for it. Only in so far as the direct product can be realized in distant 
markets in mass quantities in proportion to reductions in the transport costs, 
and only in so far as at the same time the means of communication and transport 
themselves can yield spheres of realization for labour, driven by capital; only in 
so far as commercial traffic takes place in massive volume—  in which more than 
necessary labour is replaced—  only to that extent is the production of cheap 
means of communication and transport a condition for production based on 
capital, and promoted by it for that reason.  All labour required in order to throw 
the finished product into circulation—  it is in economic circulation only when it 
is present on the market—  is from capital’s viewpoint a barrier to be overcome.” 
Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy , trans. Martin Nico -
laus (London: Penguin, 1973), 524–  25.
 5. Roger E. Bohn and James E. Short, How Much Information? 2009 Report 
on American Consumers , Global Information Industry Center, University of Cal -
ifornia, San Diego, http://hmi.ucsd.edu/pdf/HMI_2009_ConsumerReport_
Dec9_2009.pdf.
 6. Luciano Floridi, Information: A Very Short Introduction  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010), 6.
 7. Ibid.
 8. For an intelligent overview of information overload metaphors, see Mark 
D. Bowles, “Liquefying Information: Controlling the Flood in the Cold W ar  
and Beyond,” and in particular the section of the essay titled “W ater as Control 
Metaphor in the Cold W ar,” in Cultures of Control , ed. Miriam Levin (New Y ork: 
Routledge, 2000), 225–  46.
 9. James Gleick, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood  (New Y ork: 
Pantheon, 2011).
 10. This statistic (or earlier variants of it) has been reported, for instance,  
by Matt Richtel in “Read This and Cost Y our Company Dough,” New Y ork 
Times , December 22, 2008, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/12/22/read  
-this-and-cost-your-company-dough; as well as by Andrea Coombes, “Don’t Y ou 
Dare E-  mail This Study,” W all Street Journal , May 17, 2009, http://online.wsj  
.com/article/SB124252211780027326.html.
 11. Samuel R. Delany, Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand , 20th anniv. ed. 
(Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University Press, 2004).
 12. Bernard Stiegler, “Within the Limits of Capitalism, Economizing Means 
T aking Care,” Ars Industrialis , n.d., http://www.arsindustrialis.org/node/2922.
 Notes to Introduction  193
 13. Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President at Hampton University Com -
mencement,” The White House , May 9, 2010, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the  
- press-  office/remarks-  president-  hampton-  university-  commencement.
 14. For more on Hejinian’s phrase, see Alan Golding, “‘Isn’t the Avant-  Garde 
Always Pedagogical’: Experimental Poetics and/as Pedagogy,” Iowa Review  32, 
no. 1 (2002): 64–  71.
 15. Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin define “remediation” as “the repre -
sentation of one medium in another medium.” Remediation: Understanding New 
Media  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999), 45. As W . J.  T. Mitchell and Mark 
B. N. Hansen note, this definition is “itself, fundamentally, a remediation of 
McLuhan” and his claim that “the ‘content’ of any medium is always another 
medium.” Critical T erms for Media Studies  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2010), xiv. Transcoding is a competing, overlapping term, which would seem to 
be slightly less sweeping in its implied denunciation of content. According to Lev 
Manovich, “In new media lingo, to ‘transcode’ something is to translate it into 
another format.” The Language of New Media  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2004), 47.
 16. Brian Reed, “Visual Experiment and Oral Performance,” in The Sound of 
Poetry/The Poetry of Sound , eds. Craig Dworkin and Marjorie Perloff (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2009), 284.
 17. Ibid.
 18. William Carlos Williams, “ Asphodel, That Greeny Flower,” Collected 
Poems, Volume II: 1939–  1962, eds. A. W alton Litz and Christopher MacGowan 
(New Y ork: New Directions, 1986), 318. Copyright 1944 by William Carlos Wil -
liams. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corporation.
Introduction
 1. Sara Janius has made a parallel argument with regard to the modernist 
novel, and notes that poetry would be an equally appropriate genre for explor-  
ing modernism’s relation to technological change. Janius argues that “modernist 
aesthetics from Marcel Proust to James Joyce is an index of a technologically 
mediated crisis of the senses, a perceptual crisis that ultimately cuts across the 
question of art as such.  . . . The modernist era coincides with the historical period 
that saw the emergence of, among other things, phonography, chronophotog -
raphy, cinematography, radiography, telephony, electricity, and technologies of 
speed. Y et traditional accounts of modernism, marked as they often have been by 
an antitechnological bias, have obscured this coexistence.  . . . This makes the high 
modernist novel, along with poetry, an exceptionally appropriate field for the 
study of the relations of technology and aesthetics, since it is precisely in this 
domain that the incompatibility between the two has been most strongly asserted.” 
The Senses of Modernism: T echnology, Perception, and Aesthetics  (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor -
nell University Press, 2002), 1–  2. For comparable accounts of the interrelationship 
194 Notes to Introduction
of technology and modernist poetics, see Tim Armstrong, Modernism, T echnol -
ogy, and the Body  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), and Julian 
Murphet, Multimedia Modernism: Literature and the Anglo-  American Avant-  Garde  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009). For a comparable study of 
postwar American fiction in relation to information overload, see John Johnston, 
Information Multiplicity: American Fiction in the Age of Media Saturation  (Balti -
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998). Malcolm McCullough’s Ambient 
Commons: Attention in the Age of Embodied Information  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2013) offers an excellent overview of what he calls urban informatics, or 
the ubiquitous display of text and information in public spaces.
 2. Mitchell Whitelaw, “ Art Against Information: Case Studies in Data Prac -
tice,” fibreculture: internet theory + criticism + research  11 (2008), http://www  
.journal.fibreculture.org/issue11/issue11_whitelaw.html.
 3. Victoria V esna, ed., Database Aesthetics: Art in the Age of Information 
Overflow  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007), 114.
 4. Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires  
(New Y ork: Norton, 2010).
 5. See Richard Ohmann, Selling Culture: Magazines, Markets, and Class at 
the Turn of the Century  (New Y ork: V erso, 1996).
 6. Mark Morrisson, The Public Face of Modernism: Little Magazines, Audiences, 
and Reception, 1905–  1920 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2001), 3.
 7. W alter Benjamin, “One-  W ay Street,” in Selected Writings, Vol. 1: 1913–  1926, 
eds. Marcus Bullock and Michael Jennings (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer -
sity Press, 1996): 456.
 8. Ibid.
 9. Ibid., 457.
 10. Kenneth Goldsmith, “ A W eek of Blogs for the Poetry Foundation,” in The 
Consequence of Innovation: 21st Century Poetics , ed. Craig Dworkin (New Y ork: 
Roof Books, 2008), 148. Goldsmith is not the first to draw attention to Stein’s 
Making of Americans  as a point of origin for a poetics of exhaustion or unread -
ability; his championing of The Making of Americans  draws on the Language 
writers’ interest in Stein’s writing, which in turn owes a debt to the interest of 
1960s writers such as Dick Higgins, whose Something Else Press republished 
The Making of Americans  in 1966. Despite (or perhaps due to) its legendary 
unreadability, The Making of Americans  has a fascinating history as a perfor -
mance text. From 1975 to 2000, the Paula Cooper Gallery in New Y ork hosted 
annual marathon readings attended by artists and writers such as Alison Knowles 
and John Cage. In 2012, the journal Triple Canopy  revived this tradition with 
considerable success. A complete reading takes approximately forty-  eight hours.
 11. Mark Goble, Beautiful Circuits: Modernism and the Mediated Life  (New 
Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2010), 88.
 12. Gertrude Stein, A Primer for the Gradual Understanding of Gertrude Stein , 
ed. Robert Bartlett Haas (Los Angeles: Black Sparrow, 1971), 29.
 Notes to Introduction  195
 13. The writing of Stein and Brown’s “Readies,” like much of the writing dis -
cussed in this book, largely defies New Critical techniques of close reading—  
techniques that have often been criticized for sequestering poetry from politics 
and history. New Critical close reading has also come under attack for privileg -
ing a small canon of lyric poetry—  put in different terms, New Criticism might 
also be described as sequestering poetry from the information glut of the ex-  
panded canon of world literature. Franco Moretti has proposed a program of 
“distant reading” as a way to reorient literary scholarship away from close read -
ing. For Moretti, “the trouble with close reading (in all of its incarnations, from the 
new criticism to deconstruction) is that it necessarily depends on an extremely 
small canon. This may have become an unconscious and invisible premise by 
now, but it is an iron one nonetheless: you invest so much in individual texts only 
if you think that very few of them really matter. Otherwise, it doesn’t make sense. 
And if you want to look beyond the canon (and of course, world literature will 
do so: it would be absurd if it didn’t!) close reading will not do it. It’s not designed 
to do it, it’s designed to do the opposite. At bottom, it’s a theological exercise—  
very solemn treatment of very few texts taken very seriously—  whereas what we 
really need is a little pact with the devil: we know how to read texts, now let’s 
learn how not to read them. Distant reading: where distance, let me repeat it, is 
a condition of knowledge: it allows you to focus on units that are much smaller 
or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes—  or genres and systems.” 
“Conjectures on W orld Literature,” New Left Review  1 ( January–  February 2000), 
http://www.newleftreview.org/A2094.
 14. See Hannah Higgins and Douglas Kahn, Mainframe Experimentalism: 
Early Computing and the Foundations of the Digital Arts  (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2012). For more on the emergence of digital poetries during this 
period, see Christopher Funkhouser, Prehistoric Digital Poetry: An Archaeology of 
Forms  (T uscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2007).
 15. Lyn Hejinian, My Life  (Los Angeles: Green Integer, 2002), 70.
 16. David M. Goldes and Jonathan Spira, Information Overload: We Have Met 
the Enemy and He Is Us , Basex Inc. Corporate Report, New Y ork, 2007, http://
www.iorgforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/InformationOverload.Basex  
Report.pdf. Geoffrey Nunberg notes that it is impossible to find a definitive 
source for this frequently recycled claim. See “Farewell to the Information Age,” in 
The Book History Reader , 2nd ed., eds. David Finkelstein and Alistair McCleery 
(London: Routledge, 2006), 509–  25.
 17. Bertram Gross, The Managing of Organizations: The Administrative Strug -
gle (New Y ork: Free Press, 1964). The title of James G. Miller’s 1960 article 
“Information Input Overload and Pyschopathology,” American Journal of Psy -
chiatry  116 (1960): 695–  704, demonstrates an earlier incarnation of the term—  
several years later, the “input” seems to have become superfluous.
 18. Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Me: Lectures and Interviews , eds. Steph -
anie McLuhan and David Staines (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003), 52.
196 Notes to Introduction
 19. See Alvin T offler, Future Shock  (New Y ork: Bantam, 1970), 350–  64.
 20. For a useful survey of the influence of the U.S. military on the develop -
ment of information technologies, as well as its crucial support of emergent 
fields such as cognitive science, see Paul N. Edwards, who observes that “W orld 
W ar II nearly drowned in the noise of its own technology.” Partially in response, 
“from the early 1940s until the early 1960s, the armed forces of the United States 
were the single most important driver of digital computer development.” The 
Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold W ar America  (Cam -
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996), 210, 43.
 21. Ann Blair’s T oo Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information Before the 
Modern Age  (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale University Press, 2010), and Alex Wright’s 
Glut: Mastering Data Through the Ages  (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
2007), provide the best overviews of information overload before the modern 
era. Wright suggests Zenodotus’s catalog at the library of Alexandria as a point 
of origin. Blair does not provide a singular historical point of origin, but impor -
tantly suggests that the phenomenon predated printing.
Michael Hobart and Zachary Schiffman similarly argue that “information 
overload did not so much originate as culminate with printing, which intensified 
a problem whose intimations surfaced several centuries earlier. Scribal docu -
ment production in the Middle Ages had already advanced to the point where it 
required the development of increasingly sophisticated systems for managing 
information. The earliest of these systems simply involved the physical arrange -
ment of material on a page; later systems applied more and more elaborate taxo -
nomic principles to the problem of information management.” Information Ages: 
Literacy, Numeracy, and the Computer Revolution  (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1998), 90. Katherine Ellison suggests a later date: “By the late 
seventeenth century, information emerges as a concept, and almost immediately 
it is imagined as a physically and psychologically threatening entity, at once 
material and immaterial, with the capability of overloading the human body and 
intellect.” Fatal News: Reading and Information Overload in Early Eighteenth-  
Century Literature  (New Y ork: Routledge, 2006), 1. Innumerable historical 
examples can be cited, such as this passage from W ashington Irving’s Sketchbook : 
“The world will inevitably be overstocked with good books. It will soon be the 
employment of a lifetime merely to learn their names. Many a man of passable 
information, at the present day, reads scarcely anything other than reviews; and 
before long a man of erudition will be little better than a walking catalogue.” His-
tory, T ales, and Sketches , ed. James T uttleton (New Y ork: Library of America, 
1977), 114.
It is clearly impossible to specify a distinct point of origin for a phenomenon 
so complex and so deeply woven into the fabric of communication and data 
storage—  although clearly an exponential growth in both the quantity of data, as 
well as concern over the saturation of said data, has taken place over the course 
 Notes to Introduction  197
of the past 150 years. See also Richard R. Harper, T exture: Human Expression in 
the Age of Communications Overload  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2010), 
Douglas Rushkoff, Present Shock: When Everything Happens Now  (New Y ork: 
Penguin, 2013), and Nicholas Carr, The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to 
Our Brains  (New Y ork: Norton, 2010).
 22. As examples of the genre I am calling “information overload self-  help,” see 
Richard Saul Wurman, Information Anxiety: What to Do When Information 
Doesn’t T ell Y ou What Y ou Need to Know  (New Y ork: Doubleday, 1989), Kevin A. 
Miller, Surviving Information Overload: The Clear, Practical Guide to Help Y ou 
Stay on T op of What Y ou Need to Know  (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 
2004), and Larry Rosen, iDisorder: Understanding Our Obsession with T echnology 
and Overcoming Its Hold on Us  (New Y ork: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). For a 
slightly more highbrow incarnation of the information overload self-  help man -
ual, see William Powers’s Hamlet’s Blackberry: A Practical Philosophy for Building 
a Good Life in the Digital Age  (New Y ork: Harper, 2010).
In Self- Help, Inc.: Makeover Culture in American Life  (New Y ork: Oxford Uni -
versity Press, 2005), Micki McGee suggests that contemporary self-  help books 
primarily address what she refers to as “belabored selves”—  American workers 
who suffer from increasing pressures on their time. McGee argues that “in 
describing the nature of work on the self, the literatures of self-  improvement 
offer two distinct options: the path of endless effort and the path of absolute 
effortlessness. These correspond to the modernist/antimodernist, rational/ex-  
pressive pairs encountered before. Those experts who are committed to rational 
self- mastery (for example, Stephen R. Covey, Anthony Robbins, Helen Gurley 
Brown) propose the effortful life, while those who focus on the expressive dimen -
sion (for example, Deepak Chopra, Julia Cameron, Richard Carlson, and Eck -
hart T olle) emphasize self-  acceptance through a mystical oneness. Despite their 
apparent opposition, both approaches represent an effort to come to terms with 
the problem of contingency and vulnerability in both the labor force and life 
itself ” (145).
Self-  help books which offer advice on how to combat information overload 
typically suggest the path of effortful self-  control and precise time manage-  
ment. Excessive Internet usage is often described as a particular threat to the 
productivity and happiness of the individual, and many of these books seem to 
take knowledge workers as their normative audience. For more on self-  help and 
time management, see also my article (cowritten with Robert W eston), “Free 
Time: Overwork as an Ontological Condition,” Social T ext  94 (Spring 2008): 
135–  64.
 23. Richard R. John employs “the bureaucratic sublime” in Spreading the News: 
The American Postal System from Franklin to Morse  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1998); Robert Pepperell, “the information sublime” in “ An Infor -
mation Sublime: Knowledge After The Postmodern Condition ,” Leonardo  42, no. 
198 Notes to Introduction
5 (2009), http://www.mitpressjournals.org/toc/leon/42/5; Vincent Mosco, “the 
digital sublime” in “Loose Ends.” For a broad historical account, see David R. 
Nye, American T echnological Sublime  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996).
 24. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment , trans. W erner Pluhar (Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1987), 101.
 25. Sianne Ngai, Ugly Feelings  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
2007).
 26. Sven Spieker, The Big Archive: Art from Bureaucracy  (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2008), 5. See also James Beniger, The Control Revolution: T echnologi -
cal and Economic Origins of the Information Society  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1986).
 27. Spieker, The Big Archive , 8.
 28. Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation , trans. Sheila Faria Glaser 
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994), 79.
 29. According to the widely used “General Definition of Information” (GDI), 
information is understood “in terms of data + meaning” (Floridi, Information , 
20). Information is “understood as semantic content  . . . only if  . . . the data are 
well formed  . . . and meaningful” (21). Alex Wright offers a simple definition in 
his Glut : “Information is the juxtaposition of data to create meaning” (10). Thus 
information overload might more accurately be called “data overload,” in that 
what readers are being overloaded by is not necessarily meaning, but rather a 
flood of data which blocks access to (meaningful) information.
 30. David Shields, Reality Hungers: A Manifesto  (New Y ork: Knopf, 2010), 82.
 31. W alter Benjamin, “The Storyteller,” in Selected Writings, Vol. 3 , eds. How -
ard Eiland and Michael Jennings (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
2002), 147.
 32. T. S. Eliot, Complete Poems and Plays, 1909–  1950 (New Y ork: Harcourt 
Brace, 1971), 96.
 33. Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer, The Dialectic of Enlightenment: 
Philosophical Fragments , trans. Edmund Jephcott and ed. Gunzelin Schmid Noerr 
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2002), 139. Daniel Headrick offers a 
succinct, less polemical, version of what could be called the “dialectic of informa -
tion”: “W e have so much information, and yet the ‘betterment of humankind’ still 
escapes us. Nevertheless, we still want information—  more than ever, faster than 
ever. If this seems like a conundrum, it is because we confuse two meanings of 
progress: the instrumental and the moral. Instrumental progress relates to the 
means of achieving a given goal: getting from place to place, communicating with 
someone far away, destroying a city. Moral progress judges the goal. In ethical 
terms, the human race has made little or no progress in the past three centuries. 
But the instrumental progress in information systems  . . . has been phenomenal. 
And no one would want it otherwise.” When Information Came of Age: T echnolo -
gies of Knowledge in the Age of Reason and Revolution, 1700–  1850 (Oxford: Oxford 
 Notes to Introduction  199
University Press, 2002), 12. As Headrick’s last sentence shows, although com -
plaints about information inundation may be frequent, outright refusals of the 
instrumental progress afforded by information technology are rare.
 34. See Siegfried Kracauer, The Mass Ornament: Weimar Essays , trans. and 
ed. Thomas Levin (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995), and 
W alter Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Age of Its T echnological Reproducibility 
and Other Writings on Media , eds. Michael Jennings et al. and trans. Edmund 
Jephcott et al. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008).
 35. A more recent version of this argument is provided in Theodore Roszak’s 
The Cult of Information: A Neo-  Luddite Treatise on High-  T ech, Artificial Intelli -
gence, and the Art of True Thinking  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1994): data glut is not some unforeseen, accidental fluctuation of supply, like a 
bumper crop of wheat. It is a strategy of social control, deliberately and often 
expertly wielded. It is one of the main ways in which modern governments and 
interest groups obfuscate issues to their own advantage; they dazzle and distract 
with more raw data than the citizenry can hope to sort through (164).
It is difficult to prove Roszak’s claims empirically—  although the American 
populace’s general failure to sort through the “raw data” surrounding the lead-  up 
to the 2003 invasion of Iraq could be cited as a prime example. The communica -
tions scholar Susan J. Douglas writes that “the great irony of our time is that just 
when a globe-  encircling grid of communications systems indeed makes it possi -
ble for Americans to see and learn more than ever about the rest of the world, 
Americans have been more isolated and less informed about global politics.” 
“The T urn Within: The Irony of T echnology in a Globalized W orld,” in Rewir -
ing the “Nation”: The Place of T echnology in American Studies , eds. Carolyn de la 
Peña and Siva V aidhyanathan (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2007), 71–  72. Given the pervasiveness of this sentiment, it is difficult to explore 
in detail here.
 36. For more on modernism and mass culture, see Andreas Huyssen, After the 
Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism  (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1987), Mark W ollaeger, Modernism, Media, and Propaganda: 
British Narrative from 1900 to 1945  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
2006), Thomas Strychacz, Modernism, Mass Culture, and Professionalism  (Cam -
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), Allison Pease, Modernism, Mass Cul -
ture, and the Aesthetics of Obscenity  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2009), and Goble, Beautiful Circuits .
 37. T. S. Eliot, The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism  (London: 
Methuen, 1920), 9.
 38. Ezra Pound, Guide to Kulchur  (New Y ork: New Directions, 1952), 23.
 39. Ezra Pound, ABC of Reading  (New Y ork: New Directions, 1960), 17.
 40. I. A. Richards, “Mr. Eliot’s Poems,” in T . S. Eliot: The Contemporary Reviews , 
ed. Jewel Spears Broker (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 138.
200 Notes to Introduction
 41. Ezra Pound, Ezra Pound Speaking: Radio Speeches of World W ar II , ed. 
Leonard Doob (W estport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1978), 172.
 42. T. S. Eliot, Selected Essays, 1917–  1932 (New Y ork: Harcourt Brace, 1932), 247.
 43. Many of modernism’s canonical figures depict taking time out from their 
overloaded schedules in order to carry out their true vocation as poets: T.  S. Eliot 
at Lloyd’s Bank; W allace Stevens at an insurance company; William Carlos Wil -
liams at his medical practice. Eliot himself would write to his patron John Quinn 
in 1921, “The chief drawback to my present mode of life is the lack of continuous  
time, not getting more than a few hours together for myself, which breaks the 
concentration required for turning out a poem of any length.” Letters of T .  S. Eliot: 
Vol. 1, 1898–  1921, ed. V alerie Eliot (New Y ork: Houghton Mifflin, 1988), 557.
 44. See Joanne Y ates, Control Through Communication: The Rise of System in 
American Management  (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), and 
Alan Liu, Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information  (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2004) and “Transcendental Data,” in Local Tran -
scendence: Essays on Postmodern Historicism and the Database  (Chicago: Univer -
sity of Chicago Press, 2008), 209–  36.
 45. See Ian Burn, “The ‘Sixties: Crisis and Aftermath (or the Memoirs of an 
Ex- Conceptual Artist),” in Conceptual Art: A Critical Anthology , eds. Alexander 
Alberro and Blake Stimson (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999), 392–  409.
 46. For more on poetry in the workplace in the postwar period, see Jasper 
Bernes, “John Ashbery’s Free Indirect Labor,” Modern Language Quarterly  74,  
no. 4 (2013): 517–  40.
 47. Robert Fitterman, Rob the Plagiarist: Others Writing by Robert Fitterman  
(New Y ork: Roof Books, 2009), 10–  11.
 48. Oulipo Compendium , eds. Alastair Brotchie and Harry Matthews (Lon -
don: Atlas Press, 1998), 14.
 49. “ Author’s Introduction” to The Wedge , in Collected Poems, Volume II , 54.
 50. Raymond Queneau, “W ealth and Limit,” in Letters, Numbers, Forms: 
Essays, 1928–  1970, trans. Jordan Stump (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
2007), 45.
 51. Ibid., 46.
 52. Ibid., 45.
 53. Marjorie Perloff, Radical Artifice: Writing Poetry in the Age of Media  (Chi -
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), 19.
 54. Bruce Sterling, “The Life and Death of Media,” in Sound Unbound: Sam -
pling Digital Music and Culture , ed. Paul D. Miller (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2008), 75. Recent books championing “the Whig theory of technological 
history” not surprisingly tend to downplay or ignore information overload; instead, 
they often tout the benefits of collaboration and of the wiki model of knowledge 
production. See for instance Cass R. Sunstein, Infotopia: How Many Minds  
Produce Knowledge  (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2006), Clay Shirky, 
 Notes to Introduction  201
Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations  (New 
Y ork: Penguin, 2008), Don T apscott and Anthony Williams, Wikinomics: How 
Mass Collaboration Changes Everything  (New Y ork: Portfolio, 2006), and Clive 
Thompson , Smarter Than Y ou Think: How T echnology Is Changing Our Minds 
for the Better  (New Y ork: Penguin, 2013). The legal scholar Cass Sunstein is par -
ticularly notable within this group, since he headed the Obama administration’s 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (established by the Paperwork 
Reduction Act of 1980).
 55. Edward R. Tufte, Envisioning Information  (Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics 
Press, 1990), 50–  51.
 56. Steven Johnson, Interface Culture: How New T echnology Transforms the 
W ay We Create and Communicate  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 1997), 237.
 57. Alexander Galloway’s Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization  
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004) offers a particularly stringent critique of 
what might be called the ideology of the transparent interface. Galloway contests 
the tendency “for contemporary critics to describe the Internet as an unpredict -
able mass of data—  rhizomatic and lacking central organization. This position 
states that since new communication technologies are based on the elimination 
of centralized command and hierarchical control, it follows that the world is 
witnessing a general disappearance of control as such” (8). Against the notion 
that the web is an anarchic mass which it is possible to navigate through neutral 
interfaces, Galloway proposes that rather than conceiving of the structure of  
the Internet as decentralized, we should conceive of it as distributed: “The Net 
is not simply a new, anarchical media format, ushering in the virtues of multiplic -
ity and diversity, but is, in fact, a highly sophisticated system of rules and regula -
tions (protocol)” (69). Galloway takes no position on information overload, but 
he does suggest that “it is through  protocol that one must guide one’s efforts not 
against it” (17). See also Galloway’s The Interface Effect  (London: Polity, 2013).
 58. Y ohai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms 
Markets and Freedom  (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale University Press, 2007), 172.
 59. Ibid., 174. Eli Pariser’s The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from 
Yo u (New Y ork: Penguin, 2011) argues convincingly that although the rise of per -
sonalized Internet content delivery strategies (on the part of Google, Facebook, 
Apple, and others) may counter the effects of the information glut, those same 
strategies also threaten to put unprecedented control over media content and 
personal information in the hands of a small number of corporations. Pariser 
also expresses considerable concern about what he calls “The Adderall Society” 
(discussed below).
 60. Ibid., 235.
 61. Richard Foreman et al., “Discussion of The Pancake People; or, The Gods 
Are Pounding My Head ,” Edge: The Third Culture , n.d., http://www.edge.org/3rd  
_culture/foreman05/foreman05_index.html.
202 Notes to Introduction
 62. Ibid.
 63. Ibid.
 64. Ibid.
 65. Mark Poster, Information Please: Culture and Politics in the Age of Digital 
Machines  (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006), 52.
 66. Ibid., 154.
 67. Jonathan Crary, Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern 
Culture  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001), 13.
 68. Ibid., 35–  36. In the discussion that follows, I use both the designations 
ADD and ADHD, although I prefer the current term ADHD, which replaced 
ADD in the DSM-  III- R introduced in 1987. Many humanists, including Crary, 
have continued to use the designation ADD long after it has gone out of use 
within the psychiatric literature.
 69. Ibid., 37.
 70. Thomas E. Brown, Attention Deficit Disorder: The Unfocused Mind in 
Children and Adults  (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale University Press, 2006), 246.
 71. T orkel Klingberg, The Overflowing Brain: Information Overload and the 
Limits of Working Memory  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 19, 39.
 72. Bernard Stiegler, T aking Care of Y outh and the Generations , trans. Stephen 
Barker (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2010), 87, 89.
 73. Betsy Sparrow, Jenny Liu, and Daniel M. W egner, “Google Effects on 
Memory: Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at Y our Fingertips,” 
Science  333 (2011): 778.
 74. Ibid.
 75. N. Katherine Hayles, “Hyper and Deep Attention: The Generational 
Divide,” Profession  (2007): 187. See also Hayles, How We Think: Digital Media 
and Contemporary T echnogenesis  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 
and Cathy Davidson, Now Y ou See It: How the Brain Science of Attention Will 
Transform the W ay We Live, Work, and Learn  (New Y ork: Viking, 2011). See also 
Karen Littau,  Theories of Reading: Books, Bodies and Bibliomania  (Cambridge: 
Polity, 2006).
 76. For an excellent (if somewhat alarmist) introductory overview of ques -
tions surrounding technology and distraction in the classroom, see “Digital 
Nation: Life on the Virtual Frontier,” a special episode of the PBS television 
show Frontline , n.d., http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/digitalnation/.
 77. Georges Perec, Species of Spaces and Other Pieces , trans. John Sturrock 
(London: Penguin, 1997), 182.
 78. T an Lin, plagiarism/outsource, Notes T owards the Definition of Culture, 
Untitled Heath Ledger Project, a history of the search engine, disco OS  (Canary 
Islands: Zasterle Press, 2010), n.p.
 79. “The T ortoise and the Hare: Dale Smith and Kenneth Goldsmith Parse 
Slow and Fast Poetries,” Jacket 2  38 (Fall 2009), http://www.jacketmagazine  
 Notes to Introduction  203
.com/38/iv-smith-goldsmith.shtml. See also Smith’s “Slow Poetry: An Intro -
duction,” Big Bridge , 2009, http://www.bigbridge.org/BB14/SLOWPO.HTM.
 80. “The T ortoise and the Hare.”
 81. Ibid.
 82. John Ashbery, Collected Poems, 1956–  1987, ed. Mark Ford (New Y ork: 
Library of America, 2008), 280.
 83. Joshua Clover, “‘ A Form Adequate to History’: T oward a Renewed Marx -
ist Poetics,” Paideuma  37 ( January 2010): 326.
 84. Sue Currell, “Streamlining the Eye: Speed Reading and the Revolution of 
W ords, 1870–  1940,” in Residual Media , ed. Charles Acland (Minneapolis: Uni -
versity of Minnesota Press, 2007), 350.
 85. The slow versus speed reading debate has taken a number of forms.  
Lindsay W aters (the influential executive editor of Harvard University Press) 
has recently advocated a return to slow reading. See W aters’s “Time for Reading,” 
Chronicle Review  53, no. 23 (2007), http://chronicle.com/article/Time-for-Read  
ing/10505, in which he takes Franco Moretti to task for being a kind of destroyer 
of literature. In order to do so, W aters somewhat misrepresents Moretti’s case 
for “distant reading.” Moretti does not call for speed reading or an end to reading, 
but for a more systematic scholarship. So far as I am aware, Moretti has made no 
programmatic attempt to influence the reading habits of non-  scholars. Moretti 
frames the issue of “distant reading” in terms of canonicity—  which is also to say, 
in terms of the epistemological question: How can any scholar be expected to 
have a comprehensive knowledge of a field so broad as world literature? W aters 
wants to read Moretti as reducing literature to a utilitarian function, but in terms 
of Moretti’s larger project this seems beside the point. The problem, in other 
words, is not Moretti’s supposedly philistine reading program; the problem is 
where and when to find “time for reading” the vast quantity of literature at the 
scholar’s disposal. For more on distant reading, see note 13, as well as Moretti’s 
Distant Reading  (London: V erso, 2013). For a compelling overview of how read -
ing practices have changed in the past few decades, see the collection I Read 
Where I Am: Exploring New Information Cultures , ed. Mieke Gerritzen, Geert 
Lovink, and Minke Kampman (Amsterdam: Graphic Design Museum, 2011).
 86. For more on the history of reading machines and their influence on 
twentieth-  century literature, see T erry Harpold, Ex- foliations: Reading Machines 
and the Upgrade Path  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008).
 87. Joan Retallack, The Poethical W ager  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2003), 192.
 88. Ibid.
 89. Jonathan Beller, “Paying Attention,” Cabinet  24 (Winter 2006–  7), http://
www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php.
 90. Herbert Simon, Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-  Making Pro -
cesses in Administrative Organizations , 4th ed. (New Y ork: Free Press, 1997), 22–  23.
204 Notes to Introduction
 91. Herbert Simon, “Designing Organizations for an Information-  Rich 
W orld,” in Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest , ed. Martin Green -
berger (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971), 40–  41.
 92. See Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow  (New Y ork: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux, 2011). For a fascinating reading of Frank O’Hara’s poetry in 
the context of T versky and Kahneman’s choice theory, see Michael Clune, Amer -
ican Literature and the Free Market, 1945–  2000  (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer -
sity Press, 2010), 53–  76.
 93. Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less  (New Y ork: 
Harper Perennial, 2005).
 94. Richard Lanham, The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the 
Age of Information  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), 21.
 95. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi,  Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience  
(New Y ork: Harper and Row, 1990), 28–  29.
 96. In The Attention Economy: Understanding the New Currency of Business  
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2001), John Beck and Thomas Daven -
port give a condensed history of all human progress through the lens of atten -
tion: “Every business is an engine fueled by attention. In the farms and fields  
of primitive societies, and in the factories of the Industrial Revolution, physical 
manpower drove the economy. In the information era, knowledge was power—  
the more a company had, the more successful it could be. But now, as flows  
of unnecessary information clog worker brains and corporate communication 
links, attention is the rare resource that truly powers a company. Recognizing 
that attention is valuable, that where it is directed is important, and that it can be 
managed like other precious resources is essential in today’s economy” (17).
 97. Anson Rabinbach, The Human Motor: Energy, Fatigue, and the Origins of 
Modernity  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 300.
 98. H. G. W ells’s 1937 “The W orld Brain” is often cited as an early example of 
the global brain metaphor. For a general overview, see “The Electronic Brain” 
chapter of Douwe Draaisma and Paul Vincent, Metaphors of Memory: A History 
of Ideas About the Mind  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 142–  51. 
For more on the development of human computer metaphors, see David Alan 
Grier, When Computers Were Human  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2007).
 99. Peter Shillingsburg, From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic Representations 
of Literary T exts  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 165.
 100.  Kenneth Golsdmith, Uncreative Writing  (New Y ork: Columbia Univer -
sity Press, 2011), 218.
 101.  John Ashbery, The T ennis Court Oath  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan 
University Press, 1962), 15.
 102.  Jasper Bernes has convincingly read Ashbery’s poetry, and especially his 
1956 poem “The Instruction Manual,” as commentaries on office work in the 
postwar era. See “John Ashbery’s Free Indirect Labor.”
 Notes to Introduction  205
 103.  Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression , trans. Eric Pre -
nowitz (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 7.
 104.  There is a considerable literature (most of it nonacademic) on the  
noosphere and/or “noetic consciousness.” For an overview see David Pitt and 
Paul Samson, eds., The Biosphere and Noosphere Reader: Global Environment, 
Society, and Change  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1999).
 105.  Klingberg, for instance, asserts, “The brains with which we are born 
today are almost identical to the those with which Cro-  Magnons were born 
forty thousand years ago.  . . . The same brain now has to take on the torrent of 
information that the digital society discharges over us. A Cro-  Magnon human 
met in one year as many people as you and I meet in one day. The volume and 
complexity of the information we’re expected to handle continues to increase” 
(Overflowing Brain , 10–  11).
 106.  Nicholas Carr’s recent The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our 
Brains  argues that the Internet has begun to affect the physiology of our brains. 
Research in this area remains inconclusive at best.
 107.  Mel Nichols, “I Google Myself,” Poetry  194, no. 4 (2009): 318–  19.
 108.  For more on this, see Rodrigo Qian Quiroga, Borges and Memory  (Cam -
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2012).
 109.  Jorge Luis Borges, Collected Fictions , trans. Andrew Hurley (New Y ork: 
Penguin, 1998), 118.
 110.  Freud also insists that “our mental apparatus  . . . has an unlimited capac -
ity for new perceptions and nevertheless lays down permanent—  even though 
not unalterable—  memory-  traces of them.” “ A Note on the Mystic Writing-   
Pad ,” in The Archive , ed. Charles Merewether (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2006), 21.
 111.  This claim is informed by Ursula Heise’s discussion of the overpopula -
tion debate and its effect on writers such as John Cage from the late 1960s 
onward. See “ Among the Everywheres: Global Crowds and the Networked 
Planet,” in Sense of Planet and Sense of Place: The Environmental Imagination of 
the Global  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 68–  90. Fred T urner’s From 
Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the 
Rise of Digital Utopianism  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008) details 
the fascinating interplay between Stewart Brand and figures such as Paul Ehrlich 
(author of the 1968 Population Bomb ) and Gregory Bateson, both of whom were 
professors of Brand’s.
 112.  Nicolas Bourriard, Postproduction  (New Y ork: Lukas and Sternberg, 
2002), 13. According to Bourriard, “Postproduction is a technical term from the 
audiovisual vocabulary used in television, film, and video. It refers to the set of 
processes applied to recorded material: montage, the inclusion of other visual or 
audio sources, subtitling, voice-  overs, and special effects” (ibid.). Drawing on 
Bourriard, the art critic John Kelsey has recently suggested that the “relational 
206 Notes to Introduction
aesthetics” movement was succeeded by a “hyperrelational aesthetics” movement 
which “emerged between 9/11 and the credit crisis and so can be squarely situated 
in relation to the collapse of the neoliberal economy.” “Next-  Level Spleen,” Art-
forum  51, no. 1 (2012): 413. Kelsey explicitly links the rise of hyperrelational aes -
thetics to the advent of ubiquitous portable computing: “For most artists today,  
the laptop and phone have already supplanted the studio as primary sites of pro -
duction. Early signs of this shift were evident in what became known as rela -
tional aesthetics, which in retrospect, seems wrongly defined as a practice in 
which communal experience became the medium. It is more properly under -
stood, rather, as a capitalist–  realist adaptation of art to the experience economy, 
obviously, but also to the new productive imperative to go mobile, as a body and 
a practice” (412).
 113.  Michel Foucault, The Archeology of Knowledge , trans. A.  M. Sheridan 
Smith (New Y ork: Vintage, 1972), 130.
 114.  Craig Dworkin, “Hypermnesia,” boundary 2 , vol. 36, no. 3 (2009): 95.
 115.  Friedrich Nietzsche, Unfashionable Observations , trans. Richard T. Gray 
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1995), 116.
 116.  Ibid., 110.
 117.  Ibid., 109.
 118.  Quoted in Friedrich Kittler, Discourse Networks, 1800/1900 , trans. Michael 
Metteer and Chris Cullens (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1990), 
200.
 119.  As Viktor Mayer-  Schönberger notes in his recent Delete: The Virtue of 
Forgetting in the Digital Age  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2009), 
“Through cheap storage technology, keeping digital information has become not 
only affordable, but frequently cheaper than taking the time to selectively delete 
some of it” (91).
 120.  Bernard Stiegler, “Memory,” in Critical T erms for Media Studies , eds.  
Mark Hansen and W . J.  T. Mitchell (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2010), 67–  68.
 121.  Jacques Derrida, Paper Machine , trans. Rachel Bowlby (Stanford, Calif.: 
Stanford University Press, 2005), 17.
 122.  Gertrude Stein, The Making of Americans  (Normal, Ill.: Dalkey Archive, 
1995), 175.
 123.  Quoted in Lucy Lippard, Six Y ears: The Dematerialization of the Art 
Object from 1966 to 1972  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973), 252.
 124.  Gustave Flaubert, Bouvard and Pécuchet , trans. Mark Polizzotti with an 
introduction by Raymond Queneau (Urbana, Ill.: Dalkey Archive, 2005), x.
 125.  Ibid., 318.
 126.  Craig Dworkin, “Introduction,” in Against Expression: An Anthology of 
Conceptual Writing , eds. Craig Dworkin and Kenneth Goldsmith (Evanston, Ill.: 
Northwestern University Press, 2011), xlvi.
 Notes to Chapter 1  207
 127.  Flaubert, Bouvard and Pécuchet , 280.
 128.  Ibid.
 129.  Ibid., 316, 280.
 130.  Against Expression , xviii.
 131.  Ibid.
 132.  Marcus Boon, In Praise of Copying  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer -
sity Press, 2010), 47.
 133.  Ibid., 76.
 134.  Ann M. Blair, T oo Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information Before 
the Modern Age  (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale University Press, 2010), 55.
 135.  “Hypermnesia,” 85.
 136.  Archive Fever , 68.
 137.  Stein, The Making of Americans , 185.
 138.  For the fullest articulation of this position, see Kittler’s Optical Media  
(Cambridge: Polity, 2010).
 139.  Friedrich Kittler, Gramophone, Film, T ypewriter , trans. Geoffrey Winthrop-  
Y oung and Michael Wutz (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999), 263.
1. “Reading at It”
 1. Gertrude Stein, Writings, 1932–  1946 , eds. Catherine R. Stimpson and 
Harriet Chessman (New Y ork: Library of America, 1998), 823.
 2. Ibid.
 3. Ibid.
 4. For an overview of the rise of information overload in the immediate 
postwar period, see Bowles, “Liquefying Information.”
 5. Gertrude Stein, “Off W e All W ent to See Germany,” Life, August 6, 1945, 
54– 58.
 6. V annevar Bush, “ As W e May Think,” Atlantic Monthly  176 ( July 1945): 
108.
 7. Ibid.
 8. For a more extensive reading of the Memex and its context, see Harpold, 
Ex- foliations , 15–  44, 70–  72.
 9. Bush, “ As W e May Think,” 101.
 10. Albert Borgmann, Holding on to Reality: The Nature of Information at the 
Turn of the Millennium  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 9.
 11. Norbert Wiener, “Men, Machines, and the W orld About,” in New Media 
Reader , eds. Noah W ardrip-  Fruin and Nick Montfort (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 2003), 66.
 12. Barbara Will, Gertrude Stein, Modernism, and the Problem of “Genius”  
(Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press, 2000), 55.
 13. Gertrude Stein, Everybody’s Autobiography  (Cambridge, Mass.: Exact 
Change, 1993), 99.
208 Notes to Chapter 1
 14. Ngai, Ugly Feelings , 253.
 15. Making of Americans , 3.
 16. Ngai, Ugly Feelings , 253.
 17. Ibid. The idea that Stein’s writings induce fatigue and exhaustion in read -
ers is not new and predates B.  F . Skinner’s “Has Gertrude Stein a Secret,” Atlan -
tic Monthly  153 ( January 1934): 50–  57. Ezra Pound claimed in 1930 that “the best 
criticism of Miss Stein known to me has been unconsciously recorded  . . . In a  
list of notes on contributors we find that Miss Stein took ‘postgrad’ work in psy -
chology at Johns Hopkins, giving special attention to ‘fatigue and unconscious 
responses.’” “Small Magazines,” English Journal  19, no. 9 (1930): 699. Whereas 
recent commentators such as Ngai have championed Stein’s ability to induce 
fatigue in readers, Pound’s implication is strongly dismissive.
 18. For more on Americanitis, see Greil Marcus, “Where Are the Elixirs of Y es -
teryear When W e Hurt?” New Y ork Times , January 26, 1998, http:/ /www.nytimes  
.com/1998/01/26/arts/one-step-back-where-are-the-elixirs-of-yesteryear-when  
-we-hurt.html.
 19. Annie Payson Call, Power Through Repose  (Cambridge, Mass.: Roberts 
Brothers, 1891).
 20. The OED  cites the earliest use of the term as an 1882 article in the Gentle -
man’s Magazine  of London.
 21. William James, Writings, 1878–  1899, ed. Gerald E. Myers (New Y ork: 
Library of America, 1992), 832.
 22. Crary, Suspensions of Perception , 94.
 23. Ibid., 13–  14.
 24. George Miller Beard, American Nervousness: Its Causes and Consequences  
(New Y ork: G.  P . Putnam’s Sons, 1881), 34.
 25. Ibid., 20.
 26. Ibid., 18.
 27. James, Writings, 1878–  1899, 833.
 28. Ibid.
 29. Maria Farland, “Gertrude Stein’s Brain W ork,” American Literature  76,  
no. 1 (2004): 142.
 30. Hugo Münsterberg, Psychology and Industrial Efficiency  (Boston: Hough -
ton Mifflin, 1913), 211.
 31. Gertrude Stein, “Cultivated Motor Automatism: A Study of Character in 
Its Relation to Attention,” Psychological Review  5, no. 3 (1898): 299.
 32. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 272.
 33. Leon Katz was the first to explore the influence of Sex and Character  on 
Stein’s writing. See “W eininger and The Making of Americans ,” T wentieth-  Century 
Literature  24, no. 1 (1978): 8–  26.
 34. See, for instance, Mark Niemayer’s “Hysteria and the Normal Uncon -
scious: Dual Natures in Gertrude Stein’s ‘Melanctha,’” Journal of American Studies  
 Notes to Chapter 1  209
28, no. 1 (1994): 77–  90; see also Lisa Ruddick’s chapter “Melanctha: The Costs of 
Mind W andering,” in Reading Gertrude Stein: Body, T ext, Gnosis  (Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press, 1990), 12–  54.
 35. Leon M. Solomons and Gertrude Stein, “Normal Motor Automatism,” 
Psychology Review , September 1896, 511.
 36. Ibid., 494.
 37. Ibid., 511.
 38. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 271.
 39. Steven Meyer, Irresistible Dictation: Gertrude Stein and the Correlations of 
Writing and Science  (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2001), 79.
 40. Ibid., 80.
 41. Gertrude Stein, Writings, 1903–  1932, ed. Catherine R. Stimpson and Har -
riet Chessman (New Y ork: Library of America, 1998), 3.
 42. Ibid., 8.
 43. T om Lutz, American Nervousness, 1903: An Anecdotal History  (Ithaca, 
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1993), 279.
 44. Writings, 1903–  1932, 6.
 45. Ibid., 16, 40.
 46. Ibid., 46.
 47. Ibid.
 48. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 389.
 49. Everybody’s Autobiography , 63.
 50. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 505.
 51. The Making of Americans , 47.
 52. Will,  Gertrude Stein, Modernism, and the Problem of “Genius, ”  51.
 53. Everybody’s Autobiography , 251.
 54. Ibid., 122.
 55. Barrett W atten, The Constructivist Moment: From Material T ext to Cul -
tural Poetics  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University Press, 2003), 119–  20.
 56. Ibid., 124.
 57. Writings, 1903–  1946 , 811.
 58. For this argument, I am indebted to Jenelle Troxell’s “Shock and Contem -
plation: ‘Close Up’ and the Female Avant-  Garde” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia Uni -
versity, 2009), which argues that Stein, along with other female contributors to 
the film journal Close Up , proposed a contemplative aesthetic in response to the 
shock effects championed by theorists such as Siegfried Kracauer and W alter 
Benjamin.
 59. Gertrude Stein, How to Write  (New Y ork: Dover, 1975), 8.
 60. Gertrude Stein, Stanzas in Meditation: The Corrected Edition , eds. Susan -
nah Hollister and Emily Setina (New Haven, Conn.: Y ale University Press), 191.
 61. Ellen Berry, Curved Thought and T extual W andering  (Ann Arbor: Univer -
sity of Michigan Press, 1992), 18.
210 Notes to Chapter 1
 62. Will,  Gertrude Stein, Modernism, and the Problem of “Genius, ”  25.
 63. The Making of Americans , 815.
 64. Quoted in Gary Small and Gigi V organ, iBrain: Surviving the T echnological 
Alteration of the Modern Mind  (New Y ork: Harper, 2009), 18.
 65. Ibid., 18.
 66. James, Writings, 1878–  1899, 216.
 67. Ruddick, Reading Gertrude Stein , 38.
 68. James, Writings, 1878–  1899, 223; Stein, Writings, 1903–  1932, 344.
 69. Meyer, Irresistible Dictation , 33.
 70. James, Writings, 1878–  1899, 219.
 71. Will, Gertrude Stein, Modernism, and the Problem of “Genius, ”  30.
 72. Ronald Martin, American Literature and the Destruction of Knowledge: 
Innovative Writing in the Age of Epistemology  (Durham, N.C.: Duke University 
Press, 1991), 179.
 73. For the fullest account of T aylorism in relation to modernist literature, see 
Martha Banta, T aylored Lives: Narrative Productions in the Age of T aylor, Veblen, 
and Ford  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993).
 74. Münsterberg, Psychology and Industrial Efficiency , 208.
 75. Gertrude Stein, Useful Knowledge  (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill, 1988), 
28. Used by permission of Station Hill of Barrytown.
 76. Ibid., 29.
 77. Joan Retallack, The Poethical W ager  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2004), 151.
 78. Gertrude Stein, How Writing Is Written , ed. Robert Bartlett Haas (Los 
Angeles: Black Sparrow, 1974), 89.
 79. Ibid., 91.
 80. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 303.
 81. A Primer for the Gradual Understanding of Gertrude Stein , 33.
 82. Ibid., 22.
 83. For more on Stein’s relation to her own fame and to publicity, see Goble, 
Beautiful Circuits , 85–  148, and Katherine Biers, “Gertrude Stein T alking,” in Vir-
tual Modernism: Writing and T echnology in the Progressive Era  (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2013), 173–  99. For more on Stein’s interest in 
radio, see Sarah Wilson, “Gertrude Stein and the Radio,” in Broadcasting Mod -
ernism , eds. Debra Rae Cohen et al. (T allahassee: University Press of Florida, 
2009), 107–  23.
 84. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 298.
 85. How Writing Is Written , 157. For more on Stein’s attitudes toward mass 
culture, see Alyson Tischler, “ A Rose Is a Pose: Steinian Modernism and Mass 
Culture,” Journal of Modern Literature  26, nos. 3–  4 (2003): 12–  27.
 86. Everybody’s Autobiography , 55.
 87. Ibid., 101.
 Notes to Chapter 1  211
 88. Ibid., 102.
 89. How Writing Is Written , 155.
 90. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 286.
 91. Meyer, Irresistible Dictation , 320.
 92. Ibid., 16.
 93. Stanzas in Meditation , 248.
 94. Crary, Suspensions of Perception , 46.
 95. Ibid., 22–  23.
 96. Ibid., 24–  25.
 97. Writings, 1932–  1946 , 303.
 98. Ibid., 294.
 99. Gertrude Stein, “ American Language and Literature,” in Gertrude Stein 
and the Making of Literature , eds. Shirley Neuman and Ira B. Nadel (Boston: 
Northeastern University Press, 1988), 231.
 100.  Ibid., 228–  29.
 101.  Ibid., 229.
 102.  For more on the movement of language in Stein’s writings, see Jonathan 
Levin’s “Gertrude Stein and the Movement of W ords,” in The Poetics of Transi -
tion: Emerson, Pragmatism, and American Literary Modernism  (Durham, N.C.: 
Duke University Press, 1999), 145–  66.
 103.  William Carlos Williams, Imaginations , ed. W ebster Schott (New Y ork: 
New Directions, 1970), 350.
 104.  Ibid., 349–  50.
 105.  Quoted in Meyer, Irresistible Dictation , 227.
 106.  Quoted in ibid., 321–  22.
 107.  Ibid., 326.
 108.  See Marjorie Perloff, The Poetics of Indeterminacy: Rimbaud to Cage  
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1981).
 109.  “Reflection” MS, Y ale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare 
Book and Manuscript Library. For a useful overview of Stein’s manuscript prac-
tices, see Gabrielle Dean, “Grid Games: Gertrude Stein’s Diagrams and Detec -
tives,” Modernism/Modernity  15, no. 2 (2008): 317–  41.
 110.  Barbara Will, Unlikely Collaboration: Gertrude Stein, Bernard Faÿ, and the 
Vichy Dilemma  (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2011).
 111.  Barbara Will, “Gertrude Stein, Bernard Faÿ, and the Ruthless Flowers of 
Friendship,” Modernism/Modernity  15, no. 4 (2008): 663.
 112.  John Whittier-  Ferguson, “The Liberation of Gertrude Stein: W ar and 
Writing,” Modernism/Modernity  8, no. 3 (2001): 423.
 113.  Stacy Lavin, “The Globe Is All One: W ars I Have Seen  as Proto-  network 
Narrative,” Digital Humanities Quarterly  5, no. 2 (2011), http://www.digitalhu  
manities.org/dhq/vol/5/2/000096/000096.html.
 114.  Gertrude Stein, Mrs. Reynolds  (Los Angeles: Sun and Moon, 1988), 57.
212 Notes to Chapter 1
 115.  Goble, Beautiful Circuits , 238.
 116.  Barbara Wineapple, “The Politics of Politics; or, How the Atomic Bomb 
Didn’t Interest Gertrude Stein and Emily Dickinson,” South Central Review  23, 
no. 3 (2006): 37–  38.
 117.  McLuhan,  Understanding Me , 47.
 118.  Alice B. T oklas, What Is Remembered  (New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1963), 173.
 119.  Gertrude Stein, W ars I Have Seen  (New Y ork: Random House, 1946), 
170.
2. Bob Brown, “Inforg”
 1. Readies for Bob Brown’s Machine  (Cagnes-  sur- Mer, France: Roving Eye 
Press, 1931), 154. There are three distinct incarnations of the “Readies” project. 
The first incarnation appeared in transition: an international quarterly for creative 
experiment  (“Spring-  Summer Number,” June 1930): 167–  73; for ease of reference, 
I refer to this version as “The Readies,” and I quote from the version republished 
in the anthology In transition: Writing and Art from transition Magazine, 1927–  
1930 (New Y ork: Anchor Books, 1990), 59–  65. The second incarnation, pub -
lished in 1930, is the version republished and edited by Craig Saper (Houston: 
Rice University Press, 2009). The third incarnation is the full anthology Readies 
for Bob Brown’s Machine  published in 1931, which in subsequent notes I refer to 
as The Readies . Saper’s afterwords to “The Readies” and Word s  serve as excellent 
introductions to Brown’s work. Saper has also produced a useful simulation and 
overview of the reading machine, available at http://www.readies.org/.
 2. Floridi, Information , 9.
 3. Goldsmith, “ A W eek of Blogs for the Poetry Foundation,” 143.
 4. Laws of Cool , 4.
 5. Jerome McGann, Black Riders: The Visible Language of Modernism  
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), 89.
 6. Craig Saper is in the process of writing a biography of Brown.
 7. Michael North, “The Movies, the Readies, and the ‘Revolution of the 
Wo rd ,’ ” Modernism/Modernity  9, no. 2 (2002): 216.
 8. Michael North, Camera Works: Photography and the T wentieth-  Century 
Word  (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2005), 61–  82.
 9. By Brown’s own account, Ezra Pound “thought my writing wasn’t so bad, 
although a bit on the ‘pink popcorn’ side.” “ Autobiographical Fragment,” TS, Bob 
Brown Archive, UCLA Special Collections. Brown’s correspondence with Stein 
reveals a distinct lack of interest in his writing on her part. See “Letters of Ger -
trude Stein,” Berkeley: A Journal of Modern Culture  8 (1951): 1–  2, 8.
 10. Craig Dworkin points out that “in addition to the racism, misogyny and 
homophobia which are all too familiar to readers of early twentieth-  century lit -
erature, the readies also reflect the male modernists’ often literal phallocentrism.” 
 Notes to Chapter 2  213
“‘Seeing W ords Machinewise’: T echnology and Visual Prosody,” Sagetrieb  18,  
no. 1 (1999): 59–  60. Dworkin is right to point out these features of the readies, 
but I would suggest that he underemphasizes the degree of satire and parody 
embedded in Brown’s overall project. The readies texts are frequently racist and 
sexist, and their publisher (the collection was published by Brown’s Roving Eye 
Press but edited by Hilaire Hiler) should rightly be held to account for their 
content. According to Dworkin, however, “Modernist technophilia was rarely as 
unconflicted as Brown’s” (60). In this Dworkin overstates the case, and later con -
tradicts himself when he points out that “‘The revolution of the word’  . . . was  
to take place against ‘the industrialization of expression’ ( Jolas)” (83). Dworkin 
astutely draws attention to Jolas’s larger project, but he does not sufficiently take 
into account that Brown, too, is fighting “the industrialization of expression” with 
more industrialization—  and this cannot help but be a parodic undertaking.
 11. I am thinking here of Douglas Mao and Rebecca W alkowitz’s collection 
Bad Modernisms  (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2006).
 12. Brandon Joseph, Beyond the Dream Syndicate: T ony Conrad and the Arts 
After Cage  (New Y ork: Zone Books, 2008), 54.
 13. Ibid., 51.
 14. Marjorie Perloff, “The Avant-  Garde Phase of American Modernism,” in 
Cambridge Companion to American Modernism , ed. W alter Kalaidjian (New Y ork: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005), 196.
 15. Augusto de Campos, introduction to the Brazilian edition of 1450–  1950, 
reprinted in  A MARGEM  DA MARGEM  (At th E MARGI n of th E MARGI n) (São 
Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1989), 126–  41.
 16. North writes, “For a good part of his life, Brown was little more than a 
hack writer, turning out jingles, advertisements, news stories, and popular nov -
els, one of which, What Happened to Mary , was perhaps the very first film  
novelization, adapted from the very first movie serial, issued by Edison in 1912. In 
the latter part of his life, Brown turned to cookbooks like The Complete Book of 
Cheese  or Let There Be Beer!  In between these two stints in the netherworld of 
popular journalism, Brown became one of the more intriguing of the eccentric 
writers filling out the edges of the transatlantic avant-  garde” ( Camera Works , 214).
 17. Bob Brown, Word s , ed. Craig Saper (Houston: Rice University Press, 
2009), 48.
 18. Bob Brown, 1450–  1950 (New Y ork: Jargon Books, 1959).
 19. Readies , 204.
 20. Ibid., 160.
 21. Ibid., 168.
 22. Ibid., 166.
 23. Ibid., 168.
 24. N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cyber -
netics, Literature, and Informatics  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 13.
214 Notes to Chapter 2
 25. Read ies, 168.
 26. Ibid., 159.
 27. “Readies,” 59.
 28. Readies , 161.
 29. Ibid., 185.
 30. Bob Brown, “The American Writer’s Plight,” International Literature  11 
(1935): n.p.
 31. Ibid.
 32. Global English is a complex topic: I am thinking here in particular of  
Jonathan Arac’s essay “ Anglo-  Globalism,” New Left Review  16 ( July–  August 
2002), http://www.newleftreview.org/II/16/jonathan-arac-anglo-globalism. For 
an excellent overview of Global English in relation to machine translation, see 
Rita Raley, “Machine Translation and Global English,” Y ale Journal of Criticism  
16, no. 2 (2003): 291–  313.
 33. Readies , 113.
 34. Ibid., 182–  83.
 35. Rebecca W alkowitz, Cosmopolitan Style: Modernism Beyond the Nation  
(New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2006), 77.
 36. Simon Dentith, Parody  (London: Routledge, 2000), 9.
 37. W alkowitz, Cosmopolitan Style , 2– 3.
 38. John Dewey, “ Americanism and Localism,” in The Middle Works, 1899–  
1924 , Volume 12: 1920 , eds. Jo Ann Boydston and Ralph Ross (Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois University Press, 1982), 15.
 39. Bob Brown, Globe-  Gliding  (Diessen, Germany: Roving Eye Press, 1930), 1; 
later republished as Nomadness  (New Y ork: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1931). 
Used by permission of Phoebe Brown.
 40. Paul Virilio, “Continental Drift,” in The Virilio Reader , ed. James der 
Derian (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998), 193.
 41. “Salute to All the Bob Browns,” unpublished poem, Box 67, Bob Brown 
Archive, UCLA Special Collections. Used by permission of Phoebe Brown.
 42. Bob Brown, Let There Be Beer!  (New Y ork: H. Smith and R. Haas, 1932), 
287.
 43. Ibid., 197.
 44. Ibid., 198–  99.
 45. Bob Brown, Gems: A Censored Anthology  (Cagnes-  sur- Mer, France: Rov -
ing Eye Press, 1931), 29.
 46. Readies , 114. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing 
Corp.
 47. Ibid. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp.
 48. Ibid., 185.
 49. Ibid., 114. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp.
 50. Ulla Dydo, Gertrude Stein: The Language That Rises  (Evanston, Ill.: 
Northwest ern University Press, 2003), 387.
 Notes to Chapter 3  215
 51. Readi es, 100.
 52. Paper Machine , 23.
 53. Jacques Roubaud, Poetry, etcetera: Cleaning House , trans. Guy Bennett 
(Los Angeles: Green Integer, 2007), 24–  25.
3. Human University
 1. For an overview of the rise of information overload in the immediate post -
war period, see Bowles, “Liquefying Information.” For more general historical 
accounts of information overload, see Wright, Glut , and Borgmann, Holding on 
to Reality . Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics  notes, “There is a well-  known tendency 
of libraries to become clogged by their own volume; of the sciences to develop 
such a degree of specialization that the expert is often illiterate outside his own 
minute specialty. Dr. V annevar Bush has suggested the use of mechanical aids for 
searching through vast bodies of material.” Cybernetics; or, Control and Commu -
nication in the Animal and the Machine  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1948), 
158. Olson likely would have been aware of Bush’s well-  publicized Memex, which 
Wiener alludes to here.
 2. Steve McCaffery, “Blurb,” n.d., University of Arizona Poetry Center Newslet -
ter, http://poetry.arizona.edu/newsletter/0908/charles-olson.
 3. Olson was not the first to use the term “postmodern,” but according to 
Perry Anderson, “It was [within Olson’s writing] that the elements for an affir -
mative conception of the postmodern were first assembled.” The Origins of Post -
modernity  (London: V erso, 2005), 12.
 4. Charles Olson, The Maximus Poems , ed. George Butterick (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1983), 473.
 5. For a recent account of Pound and Olson’s attitudes toward higher educa -
tion, see Alan Golding, “From Pound to Olson: The Avant-  Garde Poet as Peda -
gogue,” Journal of Modern Literature  34, no. 1 (2010): 86–  106.
 6. Robert von Hallberg, Charles Olson: The Scholar’s Art  (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1978), 1.
 7. William Carlos Williams, The Embodiment of Knowledge  (New Y ork: 
New Directions, 1974), 6–  7.
 8. Ibid., 66.
 9. Ibid., 6.
 10. Collected Poems, Volume II , 54.
 11. William Carlos Williams, Paterson , ed. Christopher MacGowan (New 
Y ork: New Directions, 1992), 6.
 12. For a useful recent overview of Olson’s politics in the immediate aftermath 
of the war, see James Ziegler, “Charles Olson’s American Studies: Call Me Ish -
mael and the Cold W ar,” Arizona Quarterly: A Journal of American Literature, 
Culture, and Theory  63, no. 2 (2007): 51–  80.
 13. Don Byrd, Charles Olson’s Maximus  (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1980), 16.
216 Notes to Chapter 3
 14. Charles Olson, Collected Poems , ed. George Butterick (Berkeley: Univer -
sity of California Press, 1997), 89–  90. Reprinted with permission of the Univer -
sity of California Press.
 15. Ibid., 89.
 16. Quoted in Ralph Maud,  Charles Olson at the Harbor  (V ancouver: T alon -
books, 2008), 129.
 17. Cybernetics , 28, 29.
 18. Ibid., 39.
 19. See also Mark Hansen, New Philosophy for New Media  (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2006), and Bodies in Code: Interfaces with Digital Media  (Lon -
don: Routledge, 2006).
 20. How We Became Posthuman , 19.
 21. Bernadette W egenstein, “The Body,” in Critical T erms for Media Study , 
eds. J.  T. Mitchell and Mark B.  N. Hansen (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2010), 34; How We Became Posthuman , 83.
 22. Charles Olson, Selected Letters , ed. Ralph Maud (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2000), 8.
 23. The Embodiment of Knowledge , 48.
 24. Ibid.
 25. Ibid., 105.
 26. Charles Olson, Selected Writings , ed. Robert Creeley (New Y ork: New 
Directions, 1966), 82.
 27. Ibid.
 28. Don Byrd, “Curriculum for the Coming of the New Polis,” talk given at 
the OlsonNow Conference, 1995, http://www.epc.buffalo.edu/authors/olson/
blog/.
 29. Borgmann, Holding on to Reality , 9.
 30. In addition to Borgmann, for useful overviews of the emergence of in-  
formation theory in the late 1940s, see Bruce Clarke, “Information,” in Critical 
T erms for Media Studies , eds. Mark Hansen and J.  T. Mitchell (Chicago: Univer -
sity of Chicago Press, 2010), 19–  34, as well as Floridi, Information , Gleick, The 
Information , Hansen, New Philosophy for New Media , and Hayles, How We 
Became Posthuman.
 31. Borgmann, Holding on to Reality , 9.
 32. Charles Olson and Robert Creeley: The Complete Correspondence, Vol. 7 , ed. 
George Butterick (Los Angeles: Black Sparrow, 1987), 238.
 33. The metaphor of the human computer had already gained considerable 
currency by 1951. Edmund C. Berkeley’s Giant Brains; or, Machines That Think  
(New Y ork: Wiley and Sons, 1949) had recently appeared, and Time ’s January 23, 
1950, cover featured a mainframe computer with human eyes and limbs. For a 
general overview of the political implications of computers in the early cold war 
era, see Edwards, The Closed World .
 Notes to Chapter 3  217
 34. Charles Olson and Robert Creeley , 238.
 35. See Ralph Maud, Charles Olson’s Reading: A Biography  (Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois University Press, 1996). Maud’s book provides one of the full -
est accounts of a postwar American poet’s reading habits, and offers a fascinating 
window into Olson’s methods and sources.
 36. Charles Olson and Robert Creeley , 238.
 37. Quoted in Maud, Charles Olson at the Harbor , 121.
 38. Charles Olson, Collected Prose , eds. Donald Allen and Benjamin Fried -
lander (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), 157.
 39. Charles Olson and Robert Creeley , 238–  39.
 40. The Maximus Poems , 249. For more on Stiegler’s distinction between 
hypomnesis and anamnesis, see his article “Memory.”
 41. Collected Prose , 155–  56.
 42. Charles Olson, “ A Draft Plan for the College, September 1, 1956,” Charles 
Olson Journal  2 (Fall 1974): 23. Olson’s invocation of “spam” in this context is 
uncannily predictive of the continued proliferation of not-  so- hot news.
 43. For the fullest account of the genesis of the Maximus  poems, see George 
Butterick, Guide to the Maximus Poems of Charles Olson  (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1980), xix–  xlv.
 44. Charles Olson, “W est and the Long Poem,” 1948–  49, TS, Box 36, Charles 
Olson Research Collection, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
 45. Ibid.
 46. “Post W est,” 1953, TS, Box 34, Charles Olson Research Collection, Uni -
versity of Connecticut, Storrs.
 47. Selected Writings , 83; “Post W est.”
 48. “Poetry and Criticism,” n.d., TS, Box 34, Charles Olson Research Collec -
tion, University of Connecticut, Storrs.
 49. Collected Prose , 172. As Butterick notes, “If Maximus reflects the poet’s life, 
it is as a personality seeking completeness; as an allegorical figure, it must be on 
the order of Man-  becoming-  all- that-  he- might-  become.” Guide to the Maximus 
Poems of Charles Olson , xxix.
 50. The Maximus Poems , 6.
 51. Ibid., 17.
 52. Collected Prose , 297.
 53. The Maximus Poems , 100.
 54. Charles Olson, Letters for Origin, 1950–  1956 (New Y ork: Cape Goliard 
Press, 1970), 9–  10.
 55. Collected Prose , 168.
 56. Benjamin Friedlander, “Introduction,” in Olson’s Prose , ed. Gary Grieve-  
Carlson (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2007), viii.
 57. Selected Writings , 130.
 58. Paper delivered at the OlsonNow Conference, 2006, http://www.olson  
now.blogspot.com/2006/05/benjamin-friedlandercharles-olson-now.html.
218 Notes to Chapter 3
 59. Collected Prose , 181.
 60. The Maximus Poems , 185.
 61. Charles Olson, Muthologos: The Collected Lectures and Interviews, Vol. 1 , 
ed. George F . Butterick (Bolinas, Calif.: Four Seasons Foundation, 1978), 99–  100.
 62. The Maximus Poems , 32.
 63. Ibid., 582.
 64. Muthologos , 100.
 65. Ibid., 22.
 66. The Maximus Poems , 576.
 67. Michael Davidson, Guys Like Us: Citing Masculinity in Cold W ar Poetics  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 36. Rachel Blau du Plessis and 
Libbie Rifkin have offered trenchant critiques of Olson’s gender politics. Du 
Plessis suggests that “the opening words [of ‘Projective V erse’] (re)claim poetry 
for masculine discourse, making poetry safe for men to enter, making poetry a 
serious discourse of aroused, exploratory manhood.” Blue Studios: Poetry and Its 
Cultural Work  (T uscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2006), 84. She is par -
ticularly critical of Olson’s treatment of Frances Boldereff, who was his central 
interlocutor in the years before he began his extensive correspondence with Rob -
ert Creeley. Du Plessis writes that “Olson proposes a posthumanist and post-  
Graeco-  Roman examination of the world. Y et he also does so by primitivist 
investments in the Noble Mayan and by masculinist investments in helpmeet 
ears” (93). For more, see Du Plessis, 72–  136, and Rifkin, Career Moves: Olson, 
Creeley, Zukofsky, Berrigan, and the American Avant-  Garde  (Madison: University 
of Wisconsin, 2001), 13–  71, as well as Sharon Thesen’s introduction to the Olson/  
Boldereff correspondence, Charles Olson and Frances Boldereff: A Modern Corres -
pondence,  eds. Ralph Maud and Sharon Thesen (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan 
University Press, 1999).
The performance artist Carolee Schneeman’s account of a visit to Olson in 
1963 contains an exceptionally vivid anecdote that bears on Olson’s gender poli -
tics and on his understanding of embodiment in relation to gender: “Olson asked 
about my work, and I explained I wanted to take painting into real time and lived 
actions, even using fragments of language. In this context he said, ‘Remember, 
when the cunt began to speak [when women were finally allowed to perform],  
it was the beginning of the end of Greek theatre’—  he meant the introduction  
of the actual feminine onto the Greek stage and weakened the pure concepts of 
language and mythology” (53; bracketed text is by Schneeman). It is unclear to 
what moment specifically in the history of Greek theater Olson is referring, and 
it may be that something has been lost in transcription. (W omen did not per -
form on the Athenian stage in antiquity; Olson may be referring to the charac-  
ter of Clytemnestra.) It is also unclear the extent to which Schneeman takes 
offense to Olson’s crude, quasi-  Nietzschean account of the decline of Greek the -
ater. T o whatever extent she was offended by Olson’s reductive declaration, she 
 Notes to Chapter 3  219
considered it an important turning point in her career: “ At that moment I con -
sidered that I must belong to the realm of ‘cunts’—  about to enter my culture in 
motion and speaking. W as there something I could destroy?” (53). What had 
initially drawn Schneeman to Olson’s work, she claims, was “the sense of the 
body as the instrument of available sensation  . . . something I recognized in the 
Maximus  poems.” Schneeman, Imagining Her Erotics: Essays, Interviews, Projects  
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002), 52.
 68. The Maximus Poems , 635.
 69. Robert Duncan, “Letter to Jess After His Last Visit to Olson in New Y ork 
Hospital, 1970,” Charles Olson Journal  1 (Spring 1974): 5.
 70. Ibid., 5–  6.
 71. Collected Prose , 307.
 72. Ibid.
 73. Charles Olson and Ezra Pound: An Encounter at St. Elizabeth’s , ed. Cather -
ine Seelye (New Y ork: Grossman, 1975), 82.
 74. Butterick, Guide to the Maximus Poems of Charles Olson , 751.
 75. The Maximus Poems , 635.
 76. Ibid., 14, Collected Prose , 307.
 77. Carla Billitteri, “Charles Olson’s Poetics of the Inactual,” Worcester Review  
31, nos. 1–  2 (2010): 83–  92.
 78. Eugene Vydrin, “Open Field Scholarship in Charles Olson’s Propriocep -
tion,” in Olson’s Prose , ed. Gary Grieve-  Carlson (Newcastle: Cambridge Schol -
ars, 2007), 177.
 79. See Jonathan Skinner, “‘Going Widdershins’: Into the W oods with 
Charles Olson,” paper delivered at the OlsonNow Conference, 2010, http://www  
.olsonconference.com/.
 80. Stephen Fredman, The Grounding of American Poetry: Charles Olson and 
the Emersonian Tradition  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 34.
 81. The Maximus Poems , 379.
 82. Collected Prose , 301.
 83. For more on “big history,” see David Christian, Maps of Time: An Introduc -
tion to Big History  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). In that book’s 
introduction, William McNeill locates the origins of the big history movement 
in Fernand Braudel’s notion of the longue durée , first proposed in 1958. Braudel, 
like Olson, was concerned about information saturation and its effects on histo -
riography. Braudel’s famous essay “History and the Social Sciences: The Longue 
Durée ” begins, “There is a general crisis in the human sciences: they are all over -
whelmed by their own progress, if only because of the accumulation of new 
knowledge.” On History , trans. Sarah Matthews (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1980), 25.
 84. I am thinking here especially of the recent OlsonNow conferences, and in 
particular of the talks cited in this essay by Skinner, Billitteri, and Friedlander. 
220 Notes to Chapter 3
See also Joshua Corey, “‘ T ansy City’: Charles Olson and the Prospects for Avant-  
Pastoral,” Comparative American Studies  7, no. 2 (2009): 111–  27.
 85. The Maximus Poems , 201. A side-  by- side comparison of Olson’s version 
and Leland’s “The Story of a Partridge and His Wigwam” reveals that Olson 
borrowed verbatim, cleverly embellishing the story by subtracting details. Olson 
may have been playing on the sentence in Leland that immediately precedes the 
partridge tale: “If any modern poet had depicted this incident in so like a style, 
every critic would have called out plagiarism!” Charles Godfrey Leland, Algon -
quin Legends of New England  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1884), 290.
 86. Daniel Belgrad, The Culture of Spontaneity: Improvisation and the Arts in 
Postwar America  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 134.
 87. Robert von Hallberg, “ American Poet–  Critics Since 1945,” in Reconstruct -
ing American Literary History , ed. Sacvan Bercovitch (Cambridge, Mass.: Har -
vard University Press, 1986), 296.
 88. Catherine Stimpson, “Charles Olson: Preliminary Images,” boundary 2 , 
vol. 2, nos. 1–  2 (1973): 151.
4. “When Information Rubs/Against Information”
 1. Eve Meltzer, “The Dream of the Information W orld,” Oxford Art Journal  
29, no. 1 (2006): 126.
 2. For more on the far-  reaching influence of The Whole Earth Catalog , see 
Fred T urner, From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth 
Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism  (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2008). In a 2006 introduction to the collected issues of 0 T o 9 , Acconci 
playfully recalls, “I remember, in 1968, you [Bernadette Mayer] were obsessed 
with The Whole Earth Catalog  (and so was I), and wasn’t that the same as the 
Internet?” 0 T o 9: The Complete Magazine, 1967–  1969, eds. Vito Acconci and  
Bernadette Mayer (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Ugly Duckling Presse, 2006), 7. By the fall  
of 1968, when the first issue of The Whole Earth Catalog  appeared, 0 T o 9  had 
already printed its first four issues.
 3. See Stan V anDerBeek, The Culture Intercom  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
List Visual Arts Center, 2011), 84.
 4. For a concise overview of the mimeograph revolution, see Stephen Clay 
and Rodney Phillips, A Secret Location on the Lower East Side: Adventures in 
Writing, 1960–  1980 (New Y ork: Granary Books, 1998), 9–  56; and on Joglars  spe-
cifically, 237.
 5. For an overview of 0 T o 9  and its importance, see Gwen Allen, Artists’ 
Magazines: An Alternative Space for Art  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2011), 
69– 89.
 6. John Cage, “McLuhan’s Influence,” in John Cage , ed. Richard Kostelanetz 
(New Y ork: Praeger, 1970), 171.
 7. Marshall McLuhan, Verbi-  Voco-  Visual Explorations  (New Y ork: Some -
thing Else Press , 1967), n.p.
 Notes to Chapter 4  221
 8. Stan V anDerBeek, “‘Culture: Intercom’ and Expanded Cinema: A Pro -
posal and Manifesto,” Joglars  3 (1966), n.p.
 9. J. C. R. Licklider, “Man-  Computer Symbiosis,” in The New Media Reader , 
eds. Noah W ardrip-  Fruin and Nick Montfort (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2003), 78.
 10. Radical Artifice , xiii; for more on Cage’s influence on artists working with 
text and image in the 1960s, see Liz Kotz, Words to Be Looked At: Language in 
1960s Art  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2007), 13–  98.
 11. John Cage, Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art and Music , ed. Joan Retal -
lack (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University Press, 1992), 51.
 12. Marshall McLuhan, “The Agenbite of Outwit,” Location  1, no. 1 (1963): 44.
 13. Marshall McLuhan, The Medium Is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects  
(New Y ork: Bantam, 1967), 79.
 14. Marshall McLuhan, The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man  
(Berkeley, Calif.: Gingko Press, 2011), 98.
 15. For a useful overview of McLuhan’s collaborative work with Quentin 
Fiore and Jerome Agel in the 1960s, see Adam Michaels and Jeffrey T. Schnapp, 
The Electronic Information Age Book: McLuhan/Agel/Fiore and the Experimental 
Paperback  (New Y ork: Princeton Architectural Press, 2012).
 16. “ An experience I had in Hawaii turned my attention to the work of  
Buckminster Fuller and the work of Marshall McLuhan.  . . . Fuller’s world map 
shows that we live on a single island. Global village (McLuhan), Spaceship Earth 
(Fuller). Make an equation between human needs and world resources (Fuller). 
I began my ‘Diary: How to Improve the W orld: Y ou Will Only Make Matters 
W orse.’ Mother said, ‘How dare you!’” “ An Autobiographical Statement,” http://
johncage.org/autobiographical_statement.html.
 17. A Y ear from Monday  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University Press, 
1967), 4.
 18. Ibid., 5.
 19. Ibid., 8.
 20. Musicage , xvii.
 21. John Cage, Silence: Lectures and Writings  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan 
University Press, 1961), 195 (spaces in original).
 22. Bern Porter, I’ve Left  (New Y ork: Something Else Press, 1971), 1.
 23. James Schevill, Where to Go, What to Do, When Y ou Are Bern Porter: A 
Personal Biography  (Gardiner, Maine: Tilbury House, 1992), 319.
 24. I’ve Left , 45.
 25. Bern Porter, Sounds That Arouse Me: Selected Writings , ed. Mark Melni -
cove (Gardiner, Maine: Tilbury House, 1993), 131.
 26. Schevill, Where to Go, What to Do, When Y ou Are Bern Porter , 271.
 27. Bernadette Mayer, Studying Hunger  (New Y ork: Adventures in Poetry/
Big Sky, 1975), 9.
222 Notes to Chapter 4
 28. Michael Sheringham, Everyday Life: Theories and Practices from Surrealism 
to the Present  (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2006), 388. See also Epstein, 
“‘Pay More Attention’: Ron Silliman’s BART  and Contemporary ‘Everyday Life 
Projects,’ ” Jacket  39 (2010), http://www.jacketmagazine.com/39/silliman-epstein  
-bart.shtml.
 29. Studying Hunger , 7.
 30. Bernadette Mayer, Studying Hunger Journals  (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station 
Hill Press, 2011), 2.
 31. Ibid., 2–  3.
 32. Studying Hunger , 42.
 33. Linda Russo, “Poetics of Adjacency: 0– 9 and the Conceptual Writing of 
Bernadette Mayer and Hannah Wiener,” in Don’t Ever Get Famous: Essays on 
New Y ork Writing After the New Y ork School , ed. Daniel Kane (Normal, Ill.: 
Dalkey Archive, 2006), 142.
 34. Clark Coolidge and Bernadette Mayer, The Cave  (New Y ork: Adventures 
in Poetry, 2009), vii.
 35. Quoted in Maggie Nelson, Women, the New Y ork School, and Other True 
Abstractions  (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2007), 100.
 36. Gene Y oungblood, Expanded Cinema  (New Y ork: Dutton, 1970), 82.
 37. Emma Kay’s 1999 Worldview — in which she recollects everything she can 
about the history of the world—  employs a similar constraint as Eruditio , and 
makes for an interesting comparison.
 38. Bernadette Mayer, Eruditio Ex Memoria  (New Y ork: Angel Hair, 1977), n.p.
 39. Ibid.
 40. Bernadette Mayer, Memory  (Plainfield, Vt.: North Atlantic Books, 1975), 
n.p.
 41. Mayer, Studying Hunger Journals , 141.
 42. Ibid.
 43. Hannah W einer, “Trans-  Space Communication,” 0 T o 9 , vol. 6 ( July 1969): 
100.
 44. Ibid.
 45. Ibid., 100–  101.
 46. Hannah W einer, Hannah Weiner’s Open House , ed. Patrick Durgin (Chi -
cago: Kenning Editions, 2007), 16. See also Judith Goldman, “Hannah=hannaH: 
Politics, Ethics, and Clairvoyance in the W ork of Hannah W einer,” differences: A 
Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies  12, no. 2 (2001): 121–  68, and Joyelle McSwee -
ney, “Disabled T exts and the Threat of Hannah W einer,” boundary 2 , vol. 36, no. 
4 (2009): 123–  32.
 47. Russo, “Poetics of Adjacency,” 146.
 48. Hannah Weiner’s Open House , 63.
 49. A number of audio recordings of Wiener are available on PennSound: 
http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/W einer.php.
 Notes to Chapter 5  223
 50. Hannah Weiner’s Open House , 64.
 51. Ibid., 65.
 52. Ibid.
 53. Ibid., 148.
 54. Ibid., 155.
 55. Ibid., 65.
5. Paradise and Informatics
 1. In addition to the works cited in this chapter, I am thinking of Ron Silli -
man’s Paradise  (Providence: Burning Deck, 1984), and Jean Day’s poem “Paradise 
and Lunch,” published in In the American Tree , ed. Ron Silliman (Orono, Maine: 
National Poetry Foundation, 1986). Peter Quartermain offers a useful list of 
Language writers who rework Dante’s Paradiso , and suggests that in part they do 
so in response to Pound: “ Andrews is not the only so-  called Language Poet to 
draw on and rework Dante in a quest for a poetic mode which will bring to an 
end our exiled condition in language, bring readers home again: one section of 
Ron Silliman’s long serial project The Alphabet , for example, is called Paradise ; 
Lyn Hejinian has in her critical writing come back again and again to the nature 
and possibility of achieving paradise through and in writing, language; one finds 
it a recurrent theme in the work of Susan Howe and Rosmarie W aldrop. It may 
very well be that such interrogations of Paradise derive, in their more or less 
immediate ancestry, from Ezra Pound’s famous conclusion in The Cantos , ‘le 
paradis n’est pas artificiel.’ Pound was pointing, first, to the futility of believing 
that we have any life other than this one, and second to the actual possibility of 
the individual achieving, however momentarily, a sense of paradise. Moments of 
coherence are unstable and transitory, but they are in Pound’s view nevertheless 
paradisal and actual; if they manifest the transcendent, that transcendence is 
secular and earthbound.” Peter Quartermain, “Paradise as Praxis: A Preliminary 
Note on Bruce Andrews’s Lip Service ,” in Stubborn Poetries: Poetic Facticity and 
the Avant-  Garde  (T uscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2013), 251–  52.
 2. Bob Perelman, Captive Audience  (Great Barrington, Mass.: The Figures, 
1988), 56.
 3. Bruce Andrews, Paradise and Method: Poetics and Praxis  (Evanston, Ill.: 
Northwestern University Press, 1996), 268.
 4. Donna Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature  
(London: Routledge, 1991), 161.
 5. Rae Armantrout et al., The Grand Piano: An Experiment in Collective 
Autobiography , 10 vols. (Detroit: Mode A, 2006–  11), 10:14–  15.
 6. Ibid., 6:24.
 7. Ibid., 6:13.
 8. Ibid., 6:48.
 9. Ibid., 2:72.
224 Notes to Chapter 5
 10. Ibid., 7:56.
 11. Thomas Frank, The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Counterculture, and 
the Rise of Hip Consumerism  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
 12. Joel Dinerstein, “T echnology and Its Discontents: On the V erge of the 
Posthuman,” in  Rewiring the “Nation”: The Place of T echnology in American Stud -
ies, eds. Carolyn de la Peña and Siva V aidhyanathan (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2007), 19–  20.
 13. Ibid., 21.
 14. Ibid., 29.
 15. Ibid., 37.
 16. How We Became Posthuman , 29.
 17. Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women , 180.
 18. Ibid., 176.
 19. Quoted in Silliman,  Paradise , 197.
 20. Bruce Andrews, “Empire and Society: T oward a Contextual Explanation 
of American Aims and Policy in Vietnam” (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1975).
 21. Lyn Hejinian, The Cell  (Los Angeles: Sun and Moon, 1992), 41.
 22. The Grand Piano , 7:57.
 23. The Guard  (Berkeley, Calif.: T uumba, 1984), 148.
 24. Jacob Edmond, “The Closures of the Open T ext: Lyn Hejinian’s ‘Paradise 
Found ,’ ” Contemporary Literature  50, no. 2 (2009): 250.
 25. Ibid., 241–  42.
 26. The Guard , 30.
 27. Quoted in Edmond, “The Closures of the Open T ext,” 253.
 28. The Guard , 21.
 29. The Grand Piano , 3:56–  57.
 30. The Language of Inquiry  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), 
46.
 31. My Life , 16.
 32. Language of Inquiry , 53.
 33. Ibid., 223.
 34. Ibid., 222.
 35. Ibid., 46.
 36. The Grand Piano , 5:131.
 37. Language of Inquiry , 157.
 38. Ibid., 240.
 39. The Cell , 31.
 40. Charles Bernstein, Rough Trades  (Los Angeles: Sun and Moon, 1991), 11.
 41. Dialectic of Enlightenment , 113.
 42. My Life in the Nineties  (New Y ork: Shark Books, 2003), 28.
 43. Ibid., 47.
 44. Ibid.
 Notes to Chapter 5  225
 45. Ibid., 33.
 46. Language of Inquiry , 77.
 47. Ibid., 224.
 48. Lyn Hejinian, Writing as an Aid to Memory  (Los Angeles: Green Integer), 
sec. 41.
 49. The Cell , 85.
 50. Writing as an Aid to Memory , sec. 7.
 51. Bruce Andrews, Lip Service  (T oronto: Coach House Books, 2001), 256.
 52. Barbara Cole, “Bruce Andrews’s V enus: Paying Lip Service to Écriture 
Feminine ,” in The Consequence of Innovation: 21st Century Poetics , ed. Craig 
Dworkin (New Y ork: Roof Books), 94.
 53. Ibid., 99.
 54. Ibid., 98.
 55. Hélène Cixous, “The Laugh of the Medusa,” Signs  1, no. 4 (Summer 1976):  
875–93.
 56. Norman O. Brown, Love’s Body  (New Y ork: Vintage, 1966), 249.
 57. Paradise and Method , 229.
 58. Louis Althusser, For Marx , trans. Ben Brewster (New Y ork: Pantheon, 
1969), 234.
 59. Ibid., 113.
 60. Paradise and Method , 13.
 61. Carla Billitteri, Language and the Renewal of Society in W alt Whitman, 
Laura (Riding) Jackson, and Charles Olson: The American Cratylus  (New Y ork: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), 160.
 62. Lip Service , 101.
 63. Ibid.
 64. Quartermain, “Paradise as Praxis,” 246–  47.
 65. Ngai, Ugly Feelings , 348.
 66. Bob Perelman, The Marginalization of Poetry: Language Writing and Liter -
ary History  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996), 98.
 67. Jerome McGann, “‘The Apparatus of Loss’: Bruce Andrews’s Writing,” 
Aerial  9 (1999): 183.
 68. Paradise and Method , 17.
 69. Ibid., 132.
 70. Bruce Andrews, “Praxis: A Political Economy of Noise and Information,” 
in Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word , ed. Charles Bernstein (New 
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1998), 75.
 71. In an unpublished interview, Andrews gives an extensive account of his 
compositional practice: “ At some point in the late ’70s  . . . I bought a paper cutter, 
which was the major technological shift in my work, much more significant than 
word processors, for instance. All my work since  . . . yeah, basically in the last 30 
years now, has been composed on small pieces of paper—  8.5/11 sheets of paper 
226 Notes to Chapter 5
cut into 6. Everything I write, pretty much—  essays, shopping lists, phone num -
bers, things I need to do, as well as poetry that I collect and create—  is all done 
on that size.  . . . This separates the reading and the writing, or the writing and the 
editing of this work, sometimes by years . I’ll often be editing words that I com -
posed, or a couple of words, on thousands of little pieces of paper—  years before. 
So I don’t have any relationship with my prior state of mind, when I wrote these 
things, and I don’t remember the epiphany that led to some vision or something, 
like poets often feel, and I can be much more mobile and flexible in editing.  . . . 
There’s something about operating at the micro-  text level of the sign that is 
something you could produce at the moment, there’s something that lends itself 
to sitting down and generating things at this micro level, and having all the possi -
bilities more readily available to you. And I don’t think that’s true with discourse. 
If you’re operating with discursive material I don’t think discursive materials of 
the variety, of the complexity, of the vividness that you want to end up with, are 
all generateable in the moment. But, what I discovered was that they’re collect -
able. So the difference to me  . . . the micro materials, these raw materials, are 
things that you could produce on the spot without any fear that you’re being way 
too limited, you know, that you could imagine all the possibilities of the alpha -
bet, and the combinations of the letters and sounds, and things and you could 
work through those  . . . with discourse you can’t — but it lends itself to a kind of 
gradual accumulation in the same way that collecting does.  . . . And that becomes 
my relationship to discursive materials—  not that I’m expected to sit down at the 
typewriter and come up with my personalized version of discursive materials, 
which is what then becomes a poem, but that I can work with editing a vast body 
of material that I accumulate and collect over time  that I wouldn’t have otherwise 
been able to do.” Bruce Andrews, unpublished interview with Dennis Büscher-  
Ulbrich, New Y ork City, September 27, 2010.
 72. Stiegler, “Memory,” 65.
 73. Ibid., 73.
 74. Language of Inquiry , 42.
6. Vanguard Total Index
 1. Manovich’s claim that “database and narrative are natural enemies” ( Lan-
guage of New Media , 225) has been much critiqued elsewhere. See, for instance, 
Victoria V esna’s collection Database Aesthetics , and in particular W einbren’s 
essay “Ocean, Database, Recut,” 61–  85.
 2. Language of New Media , 237.
 3. Rob the Plagiarist , 15.
 4. Uncreative Writing , 24.
 5. For more on the distinction, see Goldsmith, “Flarf and Conceptual Writ -
ing,” Poetry  194, no. 4 (2009): 315–  16. Conceptual art’s emergence is usually dated 
to the early to mid-  1960s; it is not until forty years later that the term conceptual 
 Notes to Chapter 6  227
writing—  first popularized by Craig Dworkin’s 2003  UbuWeb Anthology of Con -
ceptual Writing — came into circulation. Though primarily composed of 1960s 
writing, Dworkin’s primer implied a strong correlation between conceptualism 
and information technology by placing works such as the computer-  generated 
RACTER  (1984) under the banner of conceptualism. For overviews of concep -
tual writing as a movement, see Fitterman and Place, Notes on Conceptualisms  
(Brooklyn: Ugly Duckling Presse, 2009), Dworkin and Goldsmith, Against Expres -
sion, and Bergrvall et al., I’ll Drown My Book: Conceptual Writing by Women  (Los 
Angeles: Les Figues Press, 2012). For the most thorough scholarly account of 
Flarf to date, see Brian Reed, Nobody’s Business: T wenty-  First-  Century Avant-  
Garde Poetics  (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2013), 88–  120.
 6. See Ulrich Beck, Risk Society: T owards a New Modernity  (London: Sage, 
1992), and Jacob Hacker, The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and 
the Decline of the American Dream  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006). For 
an account of the risk society in relation to recent narrative fiction, see Ursula K. 
Heise, Sense of Place and Sense of Planet: The Environmental Imagination of the 
Global  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 119–  59.
 7. For a useful overview of the place of indexes and indexicality in contempo -
rary film and art, see the special “Indexicality: Trace and Sign” issue of  differences: 
A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies  18, no. 1 (2007), edited by Mary Ann Doane. 
Indexes can also fall under the purview of metadata schemes. For more, see my 
article “From the Personal to the Proprietary: Conceptual Writing’s Critique of 
Metadata,” Digital Humanities Quarterly  6, no. 2 (2012), http://www.digital  
humanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000124/000124.html. Johanna Drucker has recently 
written that “metadata schemes must be read as models of knowledge, as discur -
sive instruments that bring the object of their inquiry into being, shaping the 
fields in which they operate by defining quite explicitly what can and cannot be 
said about the objects of a particular collection or online environment.” SpecLab: 
Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative Computing  (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2009), 11.
 8. Marjorie Perloff, Unoriginal Genius: Poetry by Other Means in the New 
Century  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 122.
 9. RodrigoT oscano, “Formulas of Constraint for T ext Making (or De-  
Liberating Freedoms in Transit I),” in The Noulipian Analects , eds. Matias Vie -
neger and Christine W ertheim (Los Angeles: Les Figues Press, 2007), 91.
 10. For a useful overview of institutional critique, see Alexander Alberro and 
Blake Stimson, eds., Institutional Critique: An Anthology of Artists’ Writings  
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2009).
 11. Lucy Lippard, Six Y ears: The Dematerialization of the Art Object from 1966 
to 1972  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973). For more on the impor -
tance of Six Y ears , see Catherine Morris and Vincent Bonin, eds., Materializing 
Six Y ears: Lucy R. Lippard and the Emergence of Conceptual Art  (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Pres s, 2012).
228 Notes to Chapter 6
 12. Sol LeWitt, “S erial Project #1,” Aspen  5– 6 (1966), n.p.
 13. Against Expression , xxxvi.
 14. For more on the Information  show, see Edward Shanken’s “ Art in the Infor -
mation Age: T echnology and Conceptual Art,” in Conceptual Art: Theory, Myth 
and Practice , ed. Michael Corris (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2004). Shanken argues that the conventional art historical distinction between 
Conceptual and Art and T echnology movements is untenable, suggesting that 
conceptual writers were more centrally interested in information technology 
than has been recognized.
 15. Dan Graham, Works and Collected Writings , ed. Gloria Moure (Barcelona: 
Ediciones Poligrafa, 2009), 94.
 16. Meltzer, “The Dream of the Information W orld,” 132.
 17. Graham, Works and Collected Writings , n.p.
 18. Other 1960s artists, such as Les Levine, Robert Morris, Ed Kienholz, and 
Hans Haacke, also extensively explored financial themes within their work. For 
a contemporary overview, see Jean Lipman, “Money for Money’s Sake,” Art in 
America  58, no. 1 (1970): 76–  84.
 19. See in particular Ron Silliman’s response to the Open Letter  special issue 
on Kenneth Goldsmith, February 27, 2011, http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/gold  
smith/silliman_goldsmith.html. See also Drew Gardner’s more playful “I’ll 
Steal Y our Poets Like I Stole Y our Bike,” Harriet Blog , April 19, 2010, http://
www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2010/04/ill-steal-your-poets-like-i-stole-your  
-bike, and Johanna Drucker’s “Beyond Conceptualisms: Poetics After Critique 
and the End of the Individual V oice,” Poetry Project Newsletter  231 (April–  May 
2012): 6–  9.
 20. Against Expression , xlii.
 21. Floridi, Information , 5.
 22. Burton Malkiel, A Random W alk Down W all Street  (New Y ork: Norton, 
1973), 356.
 23. For a concise account of the history of information economics as a field, 
see Joseph Stiglitz’s “The Contributions of the Economics of Information to 
T wentieth-  Century Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  115, no. 4 (2000): 
1441–  78. The inaugural text of information economics is usually taken to be 
George Akerlof ’s 1970 “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the 
Market Mechanism,”  Quarterly Journal of Economics  84, no. 3 (1970): 488–  500.
 24. Quoted in Justin Fox, The Myth of the Rational Market: A History of Risk, 
Reward, and Delusion on W all Street  (New Y ork: Harper, 2010), 223.
 25. “Data, Data Everywhere,” The Economist , February 25, 2010, http://www  
.economist.com/node/15557443.
 26. Paul Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008  
(New Y ork: Norton, 2008), 66.
 27. The collapse of the housing bubble had particularly adverse affects for 
African Americans and Latinos. According to the Pew Charitable Trust, “From 
 Notes to Chapter 6  229
2005 to 2009, inflation-  adjusted median wealth fell by 66% among Hispanic 
households and 53% among black households, compared with just 16% among 
white households.” “In 2009, the typical white household had $113,149 in wealth, 
while the typical Hispanic household had $6,325, and the typical black house -
hold just $5,677.” Rakesh Kochhar, Richard Fry, and Paul T aylor, “W ealth Gaps 
Rise to Record Highs Between Whites, Blacks, Hispanics,” Pew Research: Social 
and Demographic Trends, July 26, 2011, http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2011  
/07/26/wealth-gaps-rise-to-record-highs-between-whites-blacks-hispanics/.
 28. See Peter Gosselin, High Wire: The Precarious Financial Lives of American 
Families  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 2008) for a comprehensive overview of the 
increasing precarity faced by American families.
 29. In 2008 alone, over one million American homeowners, including a dis -
proportionate number of African Americans and Latinos, lost their homes due 
to foreclosure. Many borrowers did not understand the terms of their mort -
gages; fewer than 10 percent of homeowners facing foreclosure received assis -
tance from the federal government. See Sewell Chan, “Inspector Reports That a 
Program Designed to Help Prevent Foreclosures Has Fallen Short,” New Y ork 
Times , July 22, 2010, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E0DE7
DE1E31F931A15754C0A9669D8B63.
 30. The informatization and financialization of the global economy over the 
past four decades has elicited a great deal of critical attention. For a general over -
view, see David Harvey,  The Enigma of Capital and the Crises of Capitalism  (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2011). For a more specific account of phenomena that 
have alternately been described as “cognitive capitalism,” “semiocapitalism,” “post-  
Fordism,” and “disaster capitalism,” see Franco Bifo Berardi, “Cognitarian Subjec -
tivation,” Are Y ou Working T oo Much? Post-  Fordism, Precarity, and the Labor of 
Art (Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2011), 134–  46.
 31. See Christopher Nealon, The Matter of Capital: Poetry and Crisis in the 
American Century  (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011), and Clo -
ver, “ A Form Adequate to History.”
 32. Charles Bernstein, Attack of the Difficult Poems: Essays and Inventions  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), 267.
 33. Ibid., 268.
 34. Ibid.
 35. Ibid., 267.
 36. Consequence of Innovation , 9.
 37. Ibid., 14.
 38. Against Expression , 89. Originally published in Asylums  (New Y ork: Asy -
lum’s Press, 1975).
 39. Against Expression ,  457.
 40. For more on “projects of attention,” see the discussion in chapter 4 of this 
volume.
230 Notes to Chapter 6
 41. T an Lin, “New Media Writing: Code vs. Database,” The Noulipian Ana -
lects, eds. Matias Viegener and Christine W ertheim (Los Angeles: Les Figues, 
2007), 145–  47.
 42. Ibid., 146.
 43. T an Lin, Seven Controlled Vocabularies and Obituary, 2004: The Joy of 
Cooking  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University Press, 2010), 122–  23.
 44. Ibid., 131.
 45. Ibid., 86.
 46. Brian Reed, for instance, has convincingly interpreted Dworkin’s Parse  as 
a commentary on the nature of academic labor. He writes, “[ Parse’s ] generative 
constraint—  to transcribe a textbook’s syntax—  proves impossible for a fallible 
human being to carry out punctiliously. Dworkin shows that the information age 
has not somehow magically dispelled alienation’s negative effects. Content provid -
ers, ‘creative’ or not, must try to fulfill the excruciating demand that they become 
teratological organisms, that is, monstrously overdeveloped in certain respects 
and impoverished in others. W orse, they discover that honestly tenaciously pur -
suing their occupation actually lowers their chances of creating worthwhile art. 
Purposeless play, as Friedrich Schiller long ago taught—  is by definition ineffi -
cient. Dworkin suggests that nowadays authentic artistry can only occur when  
a worker is distracted from or fails at an assigned task.” “Grammar Trouble,” 
boundary 2 , vol. 36, no. 3 (2009): 151–  52.
For more on Parse  and on Dworkin’s poem “Dure,” see my article “Self-  Portrait 
in a Context Mirror: Pain and Quotation in the Conceptual Writing of Craig 
Dworkin,” Postmodern Culture  19, no. 3 (2009), http://pmc.iath.virginia.edu/.
 47. Robert Fitterman, Sprawl: Metropolis 30a  (Los Angeles: Make Now Press, 
2010), 14.
 48. Robert Fitterman, “Directory,” Poetry  194, no. 4 (2009): 335.
 49. Rachel Zolf, Human Resources  (T oronto: Couch House, 2007), 36. For a 
more extensive account of Human Resources , see Reed, Nobody’s Business , 16–  26.
 50. Ibid., 67.
 51. Ibid., 74.
 52. Christian Bök, “Late Review 04,” Harriet Blog , n.d., http://www.poetry  
foundation.org/harriet/2008/02/late-review-04/.
 53. Zolf, Human Resources , 74.
 54. Ibid., 65.
 55. Bill Kennedy and Darren W ershler-  Henry, Apostrophe  (T oronto: ECW 
Press, 2006), 120.
 56. Ibid., 287.
 57. Ibid., 286.
 58. For an overview, see Kenneth Goldsmith, “Rewriting W alter Benjamin’s 
‘ Arcades Project,’” Harriet Blog , n.d., http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet  
/2011/04/rewriting-walter-benjamins-the-arcades-project/.
 Notes to Chapter 6  231
 59. For another reading of the contradictions inherent in Goldsmith’s prac -
tice, see Reed, Nobody’s Business , 76–  87.
 60. Uncreative Writing , 188.
 61. Kenneth Goldsmith, Day (Great Barrington, Mass.: The Figures, 2003), 
202.
 62. Ibid., 246.
 63. Kenneth Goldsmith, “Uncreativity as a Creative Practice,” n.d., http://epc  
.buffalo.edu/authors/goldsmith/uncreativity.html.
 64. Katherine Schulten, “Poetry Pairing: Crystalline W eather,” New Y ork Times , 
September 1, 2011, http://learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/09/01/poetry-pair  
ing-crystalline-weather/.
 65. Kenneth Goldsmith, “The Day,” Poetry  194, no. 4 (2009): 337.
 66. Alan Riding, “France’s Shock Novelist Strikes Again,” New Y ork Times , 
September 11, 2001, http://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/11/books/11ARTS.html.
 67. For a more specific discussion of Goldsmith’s role in creating Ub uWeb , see 
his Letter to Bettina Funcke  (Ostfildern, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 2011). I raise the 
topic of Ub uWeb  here in part because its existence points to important changes 
in the economy of poetry distribution. Whereas many avant-  garde books and 
journals were produced in small editions, Ub uWeb  points toward a new “gift 
economy” of the web, an indexical future (if not present) in which readers sort 
through a metaindex, rather than encountering physical texts within the con -
fines of a store, library, or classroom. Most of Goldsmith’s texts are freely avail -
able online, as well as in print versions. His texts (if indeed they are his) are thus 
fully searchable, and in effect can be indexed by the user. Like the larger web of 
which it is a part, Ub uWeb  is a continually growing and continually updated 
open system. Central to the ethos of conceptual art—  as many observers have 
noted—  has been an embrace of open systems that are dynamically responsive to 
the world around them. Indexical/categorical art, particularly if it theorizes its 
own systematicity, is often described as open-  ended in its structure. By contrast, 
a finished art object such as a painting—  as theorized for instance in Michael 
Fried’s influential 1966 “ Art and Objecthood”—  would run counter to an open 
system. A market, in a manner of speaking, is a population of shares, whose 
prices continually rise and fall. A traditional anthology or exhibition presents a 
closed catalog of writers or artists. If the UbuWeb Anthology of Conceptual Writ -
ing did not pretend to be global or comprehensive, the same cannot be said for 
Ub uWeb  as a whole, which has profoundly expanded the conditions of accessi -
bility for avant-  garde art, and has made available films, sound recordings, and 
texts from dozens of countries and languages. As Siegfried Zielinski notes,  
“In the internet, all earlier media exist side by side.”  Deep Time of the Media: 
T oward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by T echnical Means  (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2008), 31. Ub uWeb  makes available a virtual Alexandria of 
avant-  garde film, art, music, and writing. Screen and speakers are its primary 
232 Notes to Chapter 6
constraints. Unlike conceptual art, which now often commands astronomical 
sums, conceptual writing is for the most part either free or available in inexpen -
sive editions.
 68. Seth Price, “Dispersion,” Dot Dot Dot  12 (Summer 2006), http://www  
.distributedhistory.com/Dispersion2008.pdf.
 69. Ibid.
 70. For a useful introduction to the relational aesthetics movement, see Claire 
Bishop’s anthology Participation  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006).
 71. Susanne Bürner, V anishing Point: How to Disappear in America Without a 
Trace  (Frankfurt: Revolver and T oastink Press, 2006).
 72. For Rice’s original text and his repudiation of Price, see the Skeptic T ank 
website, http://www.skeptictank.org/hs/vanish.htm.
 73. See Christian Bök, The Xenotext Experiment , 2007, http://www.ubu  
.com/ubu/unpub/Unpub_022_Bok_Xenotext.pdf, Kim Rosenfield, re: evolution  
(Los Angeles: Les Figues Press, 2008), and Sarah Jacobs, Deciphering Chromo -
some 16: Index to the Report  (Y ork: Information as Material, 2006).
 74. Seth Price, How to Disappear in America  (New Y ork: Leopard Press, 
2008), 92.
 75. Dana T een Lomax’s Disclosure  (Oakland: Black Radish Books, 2011),  
and Brian Kim Stefans’s Bank of America Online Banking: A Critical Evaluation  
(Los Angeles: Citoyen Press, 2010) bear interesting comparison to Credit . Both 
works extensively reproduce their authors’ personal financial records. Disclosure  
consists entirely of official records—  ranging from report cards to dental x-  rays 
to bank statements. Stefans’s exposé makes no pretense to being poetry or  
conceptual writing (although its author is included in Against Expression ),  
and was first made available for free on Lulu.com. In reviewing the book, Marie 
Buck praises it for its lack of posturing, and suggests that we might in any case 
“read the pamphlet as an intervention into the contemporary poetry community 
of which Stefans is a part.” Buck notes, “The pamphlet begins with a Frank 
O’Hara quotation—  ‘I go on to the bank / and Miss Stillwagon (first name 
Linda I once heard) / doesn’t even look up my balance for once in her life  . . . ,’ 
suggesting that Stefans might have poets in mind. And given the pamphlet’s 
avenues of distribution, it’s safe to assume many of the people who have read it 
are poets. (I, for one, started reading it thinking I was beginning some sort of 
conceptual poem.)”
 76. Craig Dworkin blurb for Matthew Timmons’s Credit , n.d., http://www  
.arras.net/fscIII/?p=659.
 77. V anessa Place, The Guilt Project: Rape, Morality, and Law  (New Y ork: 
Other Press, 2010), 236.
 78. Ibid., 239.
 79. Paul Violi, “Index,” in Postmodern American Poetry: An Anthology , ed. Paul 
Hoover (New Y ork: Norton, 1994), 435–  38.
 Notes to Afterword  233
 80. Drawing on the e xamples of Charles Reznikoff and V anessa Place, Gold -
smith has presented a version of this argument in his “T oward a Poetics of 
Hyperrealism.” See Uncreative Writing , 83–  108.
 81. Whitelaw, “ Art Against Information,” n.p.
 82. Ibid.
 83. Derek Beaulieu, Seen of the Crime: Essays on Conceptual Writing  (Mon -
treal: Snare Books, 2011), 6.
 84. “Dispersion,” n.p.
Afterword
 1. The new media implications of Grenier’s work have been discussed by a 
number of commentators, including Perelman, The Marginalization of Poetry , 
38– 44, Golding “Language Writing, Digital Poetics, and Transitional Materiali -
ties,” in New Media Poetics: Contexts, T echnotexts, and Theories , eds. Adalaide 
Morris and Thomas Swiss (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2009), 249–  84, and 
W atten, “Poetics in the Expanded Field: T extual, Visual, Digital  . . .” (also in 
Morris and Swiss), 335–  70. Perhaps most polemical of those who have read  
Grenier’s work in the context of information technology is Michael Basinski, 
who writes, “By the simple act of refusing a type bound culture, by taking charge 
of his literary creation and not bowing to the imperial nature of words, poetics, 
and text and book, Grenier has been able to invent a form of poetry that is suit -
able for the computer era but also moves beyond the stagnancy of text-  based 
poetry, visual poetry and performance poetry. His poems best utilize the capac -
ity of the computer. He does this by not using a computer as a tool to manipulate 
text but as a medium to present his unique and individualized poetic opera -
tions.” “Robert Grenier’s Opems,” Witz  7, no. 1 (1999): 32.
For perhaps the most extensive consideration by Grenier of his poetic prac -
tice, see his online exchange with Charles Bernstein in Jacket  35 (2008), http://
www.jacketmagazine.com/35/iv-grenier-ivb-bernstein.shtml.
 2. Robert Grenier, What I Believe: Transpirations/Transpiring: Minnesota  
(Oakland: O Books, 1991), n.p.
 3. For more on Grenier’s use of Courier and his transition from typed to 
drawn poems, see Ondrea Ackerman, “W andering Lines: Robert Grenier’s Draw -
ing Poems,” Journal of Modern Literature  36, no. 4 (2013): 133–  53. Significantly, 
The Collected Poems of Larry Eigner  (co-  edited by Grenier and Curtis Faville) 
retains the mono-  spaced type of Eigner’s typescripts.
 4. I am thinking here in particular of Lisa Gitelman’s collection  “Raw Data” 
Is an Oxymoron  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013).
 5. Robert Grenier, Attention: Seven Narratives  (Buffalo, N.Y.: Institute for 
Further Studies, 1985), 18.
 6. Ibid., 23.
 7. Robert Grenier, “[Essay],” in Poetry Plastique , eds. Charles Bernstein and 
Jay Sanders (New Y ork: Gr anary Books, 2001), 73.
234 Notes to Afterword
 8. Ibid., 71–  72.
 9. Tim W ood, “Robert Grenier’s ‘ Always/Only/A/ Plenum’: A Reaction and 
a Response,” Action Y es Online Quarterly  1, no. 12 (2010), http://www.actionyes  
.org/issue10/wood/wood1.html.
 10. Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker, The Exploit: A Theory of Net -
works  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007), 144.
 11. Robert Grenier, Sentences  (Cambridge, Mass.: Whale Cloth Press, 1978).
 12. Robert Grenier, CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  (Berkeley, Calif.: T uumba Press, 1979), 
broadside. For the fullest critical treatment to date of CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS , see 
James D. Sullivan, “Book-  Length Broadside: Bob Grenier’s CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS ,” 
Jacket  2 (March 2013), https://jacket2.org/article/book-length-broadside.
 13. Ibid.
 14. Language of Inquiry , 44–  45.
 15. The slip reading “I’m a rested phenomenon” from CAMBRIDGE M’ ASS  
almost certainly refers to Zukofsky’s notoriously difficult definition of objectifi -
cation in poetry, which he describes as “a rested totality.” Louis Zukofsky, Preposi -
tions+: The Collected Critical Essays  (Middletown, Conn.: W esleyan University 
Press, 2000), 13.
 16. Kotz, 223.
 17. Craig Dworkin, No Medium  (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013), 32.
 18. Quoted in Larry Eigner, The Collected Poems , eds. Robert Grenier and 
Curtis Faville, 4 vols. (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2010), 3:728.
 19. Mark Hansen, “New Media,” in Critical T erms for Media Studies , eds. 
Mark Hansen and W .  J. T. Mitchell (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2010), 177.
235Acco nci, Vito, 109, 110, 156, 220
ADD/ADHD (attention deficit  
disorder / attention deficit  
hyperactivity disorder), 17–23, 202
Adorno, Theodor, 9–10, 89, 141–42
Allen, Donald, 4, 89
Althusser, Louis, 145–46
Americanitis, 40–49, 208
Andre, Carl, 109
Andrews, Bruce, 133–37, 144–51
Antin, David, 109
appropriation writing, 3, 12, 118–20, 
153–75
archive, 4, 8–9, 20, 26–33
archive fever, 26–33
Aristotle, 28, 100
Art & Language, 109, 156
Ashbery, John, 21, 27, 204–5
attention, 17–23, 37–57, 87–91, 96–101
attention deficit disorder / attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADD/ADHD), 17–23, 202
attention economics, 23–26
Banta, Martha, 210
Basex Inc., xi, 5, 18
Basinski, Michael, 233
Bataille, Georges, 165
Baudrillard, Jean, 9Bear d, George Miller, 42–43, 53
Beaulieu, Derek, 174
Beck, Ulrich, 154
Beckett, Samuel, 60
Belgrad, Daniel, 107–8
Beller, Jonathan, 24
Beniger, James, 8, 17, 41
Benjamin, W alter, 2–3, 9–10, 33, 104, 
167
Benkler, Y ochai, 15
Benson, Steve, 134
Berners-Lee, Tim, xiv
Bernes, Jasper, 204–5
Bernstein, Charles, 14, 133, 141, 160–62
Berrigan, T ed, 139
Berry, Ellen, 50
Biers, Katherine, 210
Billitteri, Carla, 105, 146
Blair, Ann, 35
Blau du Plessis, Rachel, 218
Bloom, Leopold, 9–10
Bök, Christian, 153, 166
Bolter, Jay David, 193
Boon, Marcus, 35
Borges, Jorge Luis, 29
Borgmann, Alfred, 39, 92
Bourriard, Nicholas, 29–30
Bowles, Mark D., 192
Boyle, K ay, 64INDEX
236 Index
Brainard, Joe, 126
Braudel, Fernand, 219
Brown, Bob, 63–85
Brown, Norman O., 145
Brown, Thomas, 18
Burn, Ian, 12
Bürner, Susanne, 171
Bush, Vannevar, 38, 92
Butterick, George, 96
Byrd, Don, 89, 92
Cage, John, 100–18
Call, Annie Payson, 41
Calvino, Italo, 76
Cixous, Hélène, 144
Clover, Joshua, 21
Cole, Barbara, 144
Collins, Jess, 133
Conrad, T ony, 65, 117
Coolidge, Clark, 110, 124–25
copia, 33–36
copyright, 35, 169, 171
Corman, Cid, 92
cosmopolitanism, 63–70
Crane, Stephen, 72
Crary, Jonathan, 17–18, 41–42
Creeley, Robert, 92–93
Crosby, Harry, 66
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 25–26
Cunard, Nancy, 66
Currell, Sue, 23
cybernetics, 88–93
Dahlberg, Edward, 91
Davenport, Guy, 87
Davidson, Michael, 102–3
de Campos, Augusto, 66
de Chardin, T eilhard, 28
Delany, Samuel, xiv, 1
Derrida, Jacques, 27–28, 32–33, 35, 84
deskilling, 12
Dewey, John, 78Dickens, Charles, 20
Dinerstein, Joel, 135–36
Douglas, Susan J., 199
Drucker, Johanna, 227
Drucker, Peter, 8
Duchamp, Marcel, 65, 68
Dud, Randolph, 178
Duncan, Robert, 92, 103
Durgin, Patrick, 127
Dworkin, Craig, 28, 30, 34–35, 156, 
158, 161, 185, 230
economics of attention. See attention 
economics
Edmond, Jacob, 138–39
Edwards, Paul N., 196
Eigner, Larry, 187–88
Eliot, T. S., 9–11
Ellison, Katherine, 196
e-mail, 32–33, 85
Epstein, Andrew, 122
Erasmus, 35
Fama, Eugene, 159
Farland, Maria, 43–44
fatigue, 8, 26, 41–49, 208
Fäy, Bernard, 59
Fiore, Quentin, 114, 121
Flaubert, Gustave, 33–34
Floridi, Luciano, 63
Foreman, Richard, 15–16
Foster, Hal, 30
Foucault, Michel, 30
Frank, Thomas, 135
Fredman, Stephen, 105
Freud, Sigmund, 29, 31, 145
Friedlander, Ben, 98
Funkhouser, Christopher, 195
Galloway, Alexander, 181, 201
Gleick, James, xi
Goble, Mark, 3, 61
 Index  237
Golding, Alan, 193, 215
Goldman, Judith, 127
Goldsmith, Kenneth, 3, 6, 21–22, 27, 
34–35, 153, 167–70
Graham, Dan, 156–57
Grenier, Robert, 177–88, 233–34
Gross, Bertram, 6–7
Grusin, Richard, 193
Hacker, Jacob, 154
Hansen, Mark, 188
Haraway, Donna, 134, 136
Harper, Richard R., 197
Hayles, N. Katherine, 19–20, 72, 90, 
136
Headrick, Daniel, 198–99
Heidegger, Martin, 177
Heise, Ursula, 205
Hejinian, Lyn, 5, 133–44
Higgins, Dick, 111
Higgins, Hannah, 5
Hobart, Michael, 196
Horkheimer, Max, 9–10, 89, 141–42
Houellebecq, Michel, 169–70
Huebler, Douglas, 33
hypermnesia, 29–30
hysteria, 41–49
index (as literary form), 153–75. See 
also copyright; Lin, T an; Zukofsky, 
Louis. See also  “no / index was 
whole / so our index / will  
sometimes lead / us to us,” 153.
information asymmetry, 153–59
information theory, 7–9, 89–92, 216
interfaces, 14–15, 34, 158, 182–83, 188
intermedia, 111
Irving, W ashington, 196
Jacobs, Sarah, 171
James, William, 41–43, 50–51
Janius, Sara, 193John, Richard R., 197
Johnson, Steven, 14–15
Johnston, John, 194
Jolas, Eugene, 64, 82, 213
Joseph, Brandon, 65, 117
Joyce, James, ix–x, 4, 51, 81
Kahn, Douglas, 5
Kahneman, Daniel, 25, 204
Kant, Immanuel, 8
Kawara, On, 156
Kelsey, John, 206
Kennedy, Bill, 166
Kittler, Friedrich, 3, 16
Klingberg, T orkel, 19
knowledge worker, 5, 8, 11–12, 154,  
197
Knowlton, Ken, 113
Komroff, Manuel, 75
Kotz, Liz, 185
Kracauer, Siegfried, 10
Krauss, Rosalind, 110
Kreymbourg, Alfred, 83
Krugman, Paul, 159
Lanham, Richard, 25
Lavin, Stacy, 61
Lefebvre, Henri, 122
Leland, Charles Godfrey, 107, 220
Le Lionnais, Fran çois, 12–13 
LeWitt, Sol, 156
Licklider, J. C. R., 113
Lin, T an, 20, 23–24, 162–64
Linsker, Eric, 21
Lippard, Lucy, 155–56
Liu, Alan, 11, 64
Lomax, Dana T een, 232
Lutz, Tom, 46
Machlup, Fritz, 92
Mac Low, Jackson, 110
Malkiel, Burton, 158
238 Index
Mallarmé, Stéphane, 2–3
Manovich, Lev, 153, 226
Marinetti, F. T., 10, 64, 74
Martin, Ronald, 52
Marx, Karl, 26, 32, 192
Marx, Leo, 191
Matthiessen, F . O., 91, 185
Mayer, Bernadette, 110, 122–26
Mayer-Scöhnberger, Viktor, 206
McCaffery, Steve, 187–88
McCullough, Malcolm, 194
McGann, Jerome, 64, 72, 149
McGee, Micki, 197
McLuhan, Marshall, 6–7, 62, 110–12, 
114–15, 117, 126, 193
McSweeney, Joyelle, 127
Meltzer, Eve, 156–57
Melville, Herman, 91, 97
metadata, 15, 33–36, 158, 163–64,  
227
Meyer, Steven, 39, 45, 51, 55–56, 59
Miller, James G., 195
Minsky, Marvin, 16
Moretti, Franco, 161, 195, 203
Morrisson, Mark, 2
Mosco, Vincent, 191
multitasking, 11, 20
Nagy, Jeff, 21
Nealon, Christopher, 160
Nemerov, Alexandra, 161–62
neurasthenia, 41–53
Ngai, Sianne, 8, 40, 148
Nichols, Mel, 28
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 30–32
North, Michael, 64, 213
Nye, David, 76
Obama, Barack, xiv, xv
Ogden, C. K., 73
Olson, Charles, 87–108
optical writing, 65–75OULIPO (Ouvroir de littérature 
potentielle), 13
overdetermination, 145–46
Palmer, Michael, 110
Pariser, Eli, 201
Pearson, Ted, 134
Pepperell, Robert, 197
Perec, Georges, 20, 122
Perelman, Bob, 133, 148
Perloff, Marjorie, 14, 59, 65, 113, 155
Piper, Adrian, 109
Place, V anessa, 173–74
Plato, 126
Pope, Alexander, 191–92
Porter, Bern, 118–21
Poster, Mark, 16–17
posthuman, the, 72, 133–39, 151
Pound, Ezra, 10–11, 81–82, 208, 212, 
223
Powers, William, 197
Price, Seth, 170–72, 175
Proust, Marcel, 126
psychopower, 19–20
Quartermain, Peter, 147, 223
Queneau, Raymond, 12–13, 14–15,  
35
Rabinbach, Anson, 26
Raley, Rita, 214
readies, the, 63–85, 195, 212–15
reading machine (Bob Brown’s), 23, 
63–85
reading speed, 56
Reed, Brian, xv–xvi, 230
remediation, xv, 5, 193
Retallack, Joan, 23, 53, 113
Rice, Fredric, 171
Richards, I. A., 11, 23
Robinson, Kit, 134
Roché, Henri-Pierre, 65
 Index  239
Rosen, Larry, 197
Rosenfield, Kim, 171
Roszak, Theodore, 199
Roubaud, Jacques, 84–85 
Ruddick, Lisa, 50–51
Rushkoff, Douglas, 197
Russell, Bertrand, 41
Russo, Linda, 124, 127
Saper, Craig, 212
Saroyan, Aram, 185
Schevill, James, 118
Schiffman, Zachary, 196
Schneeman, Carolee, 218–19
Schwartz, Barry, 25
Scott, Ramsey, 177
Sedgwick, Ellery, 59
Shanken, Edward, 228
Shannon, Claude, 39
Sheringham, Michael, 122
Sherrington, Charles, 45
Shields, David, 9
Shillingsburg, Peter, 204
Silliman, Ron, 122, 134, 223
Simon, Herbert, 24–25
Situationists, 122
Skinner, B. F ., 38, 58–59
Skinner, Jonathan, 105
Sloss, Robert Thompson, 191
Smith, Dale, 20–21
Snickars, Pelle, 191
Solomons, Leo, 44
Sparrow, Betsy, 19
speed reading, 23, 203
Spieker, Sven, 8–9
Standage, T om, 10
Stefans, Brian Kim, 232
Stein, Gertrude, 3–4, 33, 36, 37–62, 
72, 74, 83–84
Sterling, Bruce, 14
Stiegler, Bernard, xiv, 18–19, 32, 94, 
150–51Stimpson, Catherine, 108
sublime, the, 8, 13, 197–98
T aylor, Frederick Winslow, 11, 52, 73, 
210
T aylorism, 11–12, 41–53, 73, 210
Thacker, Eugene, 183
Thucydides, 92, 94
Timmons, Matthew, 172
Toffler, Alvin, 7
T oklas, Alice B., 48–49, 62
T oscano, Rodrigo, 155
Troxell, Jenelle, 209
Tufte, Edward, 14
T versky, Amos, 25
ubiquitous computing, 32–33, 194, 
206
V anDerBeek, Stan, 110–13
V esna, Victoria, 2, 8
Violi, Paul, 174
Virilio, Paul, 78
V onderau, Patrick, 191
von Hallberg, Robert, 88, 98
von M ünsterberg, Hugo, 41, 44, 52
Vydrin, Eugene, 105
W alkowitz, Rebecca, 77–78
W arhol, Andy, 122
W aters, Lindsay, 203
W atten, Barrett, 49, 110, 136–37, 182
Weber, Max, 9
W egenstein, Bernadette, 90
W einer, Hannah, 126–32
W eininger, Otto, 44
W ells, H. G., 204
W ershler, Darren, 166–67
Whitehead, Alfred North, 99, 107
Whitelaw, Mitchell, 174
Whittier-Ferguson, John, 60
Wiener, Norbert, 39, 89–93
240 Index
Will, Barbara, 39, 48–51, 60
Williams, William Carlos, xvi, 82–83, 
88–91
Wineapple, Barbara, 61–62
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 56
W ood, Beatrice, 65
Wood, Tim, 182
W ordsworth, William, 8, 150
Wright, Alex, 196, 198
Wu, Tim, 2Yates, Joanne, 11
Y oungblood, Gene, 110, 125
Zolf, Rachel, 165–66
Zukofsky, Louis, 10, 153, 185. See also 
copyright; index
PAUL STEPHENS  is a knowledge worker living in New Y ork City.
