Transnational 
Battle Field 
Rit 

$16.00 
Tijuana writer Hertberto-Yépez writes work 
that is full of anger, critique, and questions 
for writers and other citizens of the first 
worlds. Transnational Battle Field, which 
collects much of the work that he has written 
in English over the last fifteen years, is both 
a wake up call and a call out. He takes no 
prisoners as he takes on not just NAFTA and 
the US-Mexico border but also first world 
luminaries such as Amiri Baraka and Lawrence 
Ferlinghetti. Essential reading for those 
trying to figure out the role of culture in the 
revolutions to come. 
¥épez is at the forefront of a generation of 
writers who are questioning notions of fluidity 
and synthesis, a generation that has seen 
those same categories veil the advent of global 
neoliberalism... ¥épez is a forceful antipoet, 
a technician of the boundaries, a split-form 
borderzone nagualist. 
EDGAR GARCIA 
wickedly irreverent 
RODRIGO TOSCANO 
His litanies of despair and the depths of human 
misery provide an ominous view of Tijuana at 
crisis point. 
JASON WEISS 
COVER ILLUSTRATION BY AMZE EMMONS 

TRANSNATIONAL 
BATTLE FIELD 
CO 

COMMUNE EDITIONS 
Red Epic, Joshua Clover 
We Are Nothing and So Can You, Jasper Bernes 
That Winter the Wolf Came, Juliana Spahr 
A Series of Un/Natural/Disasters, Cheena Marie Lo 
Still Dirty, David Lau 
Miximum Ca'Canny the Sabotage Manuals, Ida Bérjel 
Blackout, Nanni Balestrini 
Transnational Battle Field, Hertberto-Yépez 
Special Subcommittee, Samuel Solomon 

ransnational 

Commune Editions 
Oakland, California 
communeeditions.com 
An imprint of AK Press / AK Press UK 
Oakland, California (akpress@akpress.org) 
Edinburgh, Scotland (ak@akedin.demon.co.uk) 
© 2017 Commune Editions 
we encourage the sharing of this book and everything else: omnia sunt 
communid 
Commune Editions design by Front Group Design 
(frontgroupdesign.com) 
Cover illustration by Amze Emmons 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Vener tien 
Transnational battlefield / Heriberte-Yépez 
ISBN 9781934639221 (pbk.: alk. paper) 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017936131 
Printed on acid-free paper by McNaughton & Gunn, Michigan, U.S.A. The 
paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of ANsI/ 
NISO Z39.48-1992 (R2009)(Permanence of Paper). 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2001 
Nada. Nothing. 
A ‘Ten Step Program (or a User’s Guide) 
On How | Mexicans and Americans | 
Can Know | They Have | A Body 
A Song from and to the Native Informant 
from Ethopoetics (some variations) 
Poetry in a Time of Crisis 
Bad Tripping the White Dream Poem 
On Imperial Poetics: Baraka’s Defense of Olson 
Uncertain Confession 
The Opening of the (Transnational Battle) Field 
About Me: In English u 
i 
=) 
37 
49 
71 
WT? 
wB) 
101 
105 
15 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/transnationaloatO000ypez 

2001 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
I am not experimental 
By Will. 
English is not my mother 
I cannot be but experimental 
Inside Empire. 

SU ie os aubenine rr 

Nada. Nothing. 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Every time you cross the Tijuana (Baja California-Mexico) / San 
Diego (California-US) border —“the world’s busiest port of 
entry” —a rite of passage takes place. 
“When milestones or boundary signs (e.g. a plow, an animal hide cut 
in thongs, a ditch) are ceremonially placed by a defined group 
on a delimited piece of earth, the group takes possession of it in 
such a way that a stranger who sets foot on it commits a sacrilege 
analogous to a profane person’s entrance into a sacred forest or 
temple... The prohibition against entering a given territory is 
therefore intrinsically magico-religious....”! 
You can legally perform the rite of territorial passage inside a car. 
The rite begins with you making a long line. 
Estimated wait time before reaching the primary inspection booth can 
vary significantly. It can take from 1 hour and a half to more than 4 
hours, depending on the hour and day of the week. Nobody knows 
exactly how much time will it take, though several radio stations 
give information on waiting time every 15 minutes—but what the 
1. Arnold Van Gennep, The Rites of Passage (University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1966, 16). 
Also: “For a great many peoples a stranger is sacred, endowed with magico-religious powers, 
and supernaturally benevolent or malevolent.... These rites, they maintain, are intended to make 
him neutral or benevolent, to remove the special qualities attributed to him.... The actions which 
follow an arrival of strangers in large numbers tend to reinforce local social cohesion” (Rites, 
26-27). 
iss 

radio says can have nothing in common with real lanes of cars or 
the nonexistent or massive line of pedestrians trying to legally cross 
the border. 
As you perform your role in the rite of passage inside a car, dogs will 
sniff it. 
Passenger vehicles are not supposed to touch or play with the animals 
whose job is to locate drugs and bombs. 
Dog and agents will walk between lanes of cars and you're supposed 
to keep talking about usual matters, but try to keep in mind your 
conversations may be recorded (somehow). Or you may simply be 
imagining yourself being recorded by them (somehow). ‘Talk about 
what you want them to listen to. 
You should refrain from bringing any fruits, vegetables, live or raw 
meat in an effort to combat certain diseases or bugs from entering 
the us food supply. And any weapon, drug (illegal or without 
prescription), Cuban cigars, and live animals will be confiscated by 
us Customs. 
Once you get to the inspection booth, you will meet your ritual 
partner —a Us Citizenship and Immigration Service officer. 
His first communication will be to show you his hand as a stop sign. 
He will move slowly, so as to emphasize he’s in charge, in control of 
his and your body. 
You should stay ten meters away until he completely finishes 
inspecting the vehicle and interrogating the passenger ahead of 
you. When he is finished with her, him, or them, youre next. He 
will move two of his fingers to let you know it’s your turn. 
Now is the time to put on your ritual mask. Let your jaw down and 
remove your sunglasses. 
“The metamorphosis usually concludes in a character. Character 
will not allow any more metamorphosis. Character is clear and 
is delimited in all its features... It is a way to save itself from the 
nonstop flux of metamorphosis.... Through its rigidity, the mask 
differentiates itself from all other final states of metamorphosis. In 
relation to the face’s ever changing expressive multiplicity, the mask 
implies exactly the opposite: a perfect rigidity and constancy... 
The effect of the mask is mainly outward. It creates a character... 
16 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Every language which is to you totally alien is an acoustic mask.... 
‘Lam exactly what you are looking at’ says the mask ‘and everything 
you are afraid of, remains behind.” 
Once your car stops exactly at the point where he sits in his inspection 
booth, he will look you in the eyes, which must relax—o your eyes 
so full of lies. 
At that moment, you must show your documents and you must not 
forget to give straight answers which do not deviate from the very 
precise question he is asking you. 
It is crucial you listen carefully to what the officer asks you and do not 
forget to answer him directly; short and to the point. Be prepared to 
show strong ties to your home country with official documentation 
(only if required). Ties to your home country are the things that 
bind you to home town, homeland, or current place of residence: 
job, family, financial prospects that you own or will inherit. 
Answer every question truthfully and maintain a positive attitude. Do 
not forget this ritual is about dis/closure, finding out what the truth 
is before opening the door of the new world. 
He will unequivocally begin the exchange with this ritual question. 
—What are you bringing? 
You should always say “nothing.” 
“Nothing” means you're not carrying any fruits, vegetable, drugs, or 
weapons. 
+ 
A typical dialogue would go like this: 
“What are you bringing from Mexico?” 
“Nothing.” 
“What are you bringing from Mexico?” 
“Nothing.” 
“You have to answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ What are you bringing from Mexico?” 
2, Translated into English from the Spanish translation of Elias Canetti’s Masa y poder. Obra 
completa | (DeBolsillo, Barcelona: 2005, 535-539). 
17 

“No ” 
“Good. Go ahead.”? 
BUT SOMETIMES a typical dialogue does not happen. 
You need to remember you must not—at any moment—lose your 
temper. At this point, don’t get involved. You must bear in mind 
this is routine procedure. Don’t lose your cool. Maintain eye 
contact—though not aggressive. Don’t look into his eyes —just 
open yours. He will enter into you. You should be prepared to let 
him inside your eyes, clothing, life, wallet, or car. 
It’s not personal. It has nothing to do with you. Give straight answers. 
Don’t fuck up. Do not try to enter into his eyes. Open yours wide. 
But not as if you were trying to eat him. 
Don’t swallow too much saliva. Do not speak in Spanish with other 
passengers while he is addressing you in English. All of you must 
remain silent unless your ritual partner asks you again what are 
you bringing. 
Do not cross your arms or legs. Officers are trained in body language. 
At the verbal level, remain in the generic. Just repeat what you already 
know as a right answer. Say “nothing” or “nada” but be prepared to 
explain why are you using one language or the other. 
“How come your English is so good, sir?” 
He’s trying to know if you have illegally worked in the us but are trying 
to cross as if you were just one more tourist today. 
“Living in Tijuana makes it easier for one to speak English.” 
“And why is your English so good, sir? Where did you learn it?” 
Do not explain that you learned English directly from American 
bodies. That may get you in trouble. You must not show yourself 
as someone who usually is around Americans and is familiar with 
English. If you do so, you may appear as someone who works for 
them and receives orders and often responds to Americans. Do not 
3. Originally published in Luis Humberto Crosthwaite, Instrucciones para cruzar la frontera 
(Joaquin Mortiz, México: 2002, 11) and translated into English by Harry Polkinhorn for Here's 
Tijuana, edited by Fiamma Montezemolo, René Peralta and Heriberto Yépez (Black Dog Pub- 
lishing, London, 2006). 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
open that world in the officer’s map. Keep your story clean. No 
Americans in it. Please follow instructions. 
“T learned it in school and watching Tv.” 
Your answer was not the right one. You are not following orders. It 
appears you chose to disregard laws and rules of engagement. 
You opened the wrong door, Mr. You're telling a story, a personal 1. 
The simple question by the officer was: “What are you bringing?” 
And you were supposed to say: “Nothing,” so why the hell are you 
giving away the story of your childhood? It’s beside the point. Just 
offer generic information. Don’t deviate. 
“To work with a plan that is preset is one way of avoiding subjectivity... 
the fewer decisions made in the course of completing the work 
the better. This eliminates the arbitrary, the capricious, and the 
subjective as much as possible. That is the reason for using this 
method.”* 
‘Try again. This time don’t mess up. Just answer the question truthfully. 
And don’t forget your ego will just lead you into secondary 
inspection. Repeat the preset body of text, don’t change your mind 
midway through the execution of the piece or you will compromise 
the result. 
Don’t lose sight of the fact that once the idea of this interview is 
established in your mind and the final form of the verbal exchange 
between you and the officer is trusted, the process is carried out 
blindly. There are many side effects that the border-crosser 
cannot imagine. 
“The process is mechanical and should not be tampered with. It 
should run its course.” 
Do not show any emotions. Do not get caught up in narrative. Follow 
the rules. Follow procedure. 
—What are you bringing? 
— Nothing. 
4. Sol Lewitt, “Paragraphs on Conceptual Art”, included in Theories and Documents of Contem- 
porary Art. A Sourcebook of Artist's Writings, edited by Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz (University 
of California Press, Berkeley: 1996) 824. 
5. Lewitt, “Sentences on Conceptual Art” in Theories and Documents, 827. 
19 

— Where are you going? 
—San Diego. 
—What are you doing there? 
—Shopping. 
— Shopping for what? 
—I want to look for new shoes. I need shoes. 
You messed up. 
—How come your English is so good? 
—I don’t know. 
—You don’t know? I need your wallet, sir. And your cell phone too. 
You're too romantic. You’ve come close to the lyrical, even the 
confessional. You lose sight of concepts. Try again. Remain calm 
and uncreative. 
—What are you bringing? 
—Nada. 
—Where are you going? 
—San Diego. 
—What are you doing there, sefior? 
—De compras. 
— What? 
— De compras. 
—What? Please answer me in English. You do understand 
English, right? 
—Yes. 
—So, why are you answering my questions in Spanish? What are you 
hiding? 
—Nada. Nothing. 
The officer will look into your I’s, so full of lies. Between your two 
I I there’s a separation—every | is a wall. He will look into your 
documents. He will look into the computer. He will look into your 
I, I, I... He will look for all kinds of information on you. And you 
must remain silent. And your story must remain the same. You must 
have no story at all. Nada. Nothing. 
Borders are drawn as rituals of passage that transform you into the 
stranger, the Other. Crossing the Mexico-US border is specifically a 
ritual on you becoming the “alien,” alien even to “alien” as your 
20 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
border name—and requires that you play the character of The-1- 
That-Has-Remained-The-Same. It involves bullying and a strange 
attempt to reaffirm national identities and stereotypes—in both 
directions—a performance of power and a language-game which 
pushes the alien to conceal and/or disclose the transformation of 
identity which the borders encompasses. Now you understand, 
right, sir? Are we on the same track? 
—Yes. 
—You can go now. 
Don’t say anything more. Nada. Nothing. Follow previous instructions. 
Calmly open your hand and take your documents back. 
And when Interstate 5 opens, drive without turning back, accept the 
freeway as a fast symbol of the American experience, how OPEN it 
is, how the fresh air invades your whole car, and skin, how free you 
feel. How crossing the border makes you feel “alive.” 
That’s what this rite of passage is all about. 
And please smile. Keep a positive attitude. This is just the beginning. 
Proceed accordingly. 
2) 

A ‘len Step Program 
(or a User's Guide) 
ON HOW | MEXICANS AND AMERICANS | 
CAN KNOW | THEY HAVE | A BODY 

WER Qi as) 
ake aiee § ay 
' iw 1 ae aie & 7 Se 
Ora, A pve = 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
1. 
(A phone call.) 
Receiving a Phone Call 
(Long Distance Phone Call.) 
A phone call with no bodies 
(Just the Long Distance Sound.) 
A phone call made on the subject 
Of the arrival of the American Body. 
A phone call made by the Mexican President 
Indicating to Castro 
(the Cuban Horse) 
Indicating to him (Fidel) he has to leave our country (our body), when 
the American Body, ‘The American President (the Son) arrives into 
our land | enters into our flesh. (Castro has to leave.) He has to 
leave his place so another body can take it. He had to leave so the 
other body, the American one (the Son) could enter into our body, 
our sexual body, the political one. 
75) 

Remembering we have | A Body | 
by way of Lps 
(Language 
Discomfort 
Syndrome.) 
Remembering 
The way the body feels 
When the mind 
And the voice 
Switch 
From one language to another. 
The way it’s going to feel when we 
(“The Mexicans”) 
switch into English. 
The way our mind and body 
Become 
Disconnected when such a Language Event 
Happens 
(to us). 
26 

Applying torture. 
That’s an easy way 
to find out 
others do have 
(a discourse on) pain. 
Applying torture 
Or 
Declaring war on the body 
Of the Other 
(The Afghan | The Zapatista) 
Destroying another body 
That's a good way 
To find out 
We may have a body too. 
A discourse. TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Pf 

Being a woman. 
Moving to Juarez. 
(‘Traffic.) 
Moving to Juarez. 
Being a woman. 
Getting a job in a maquiladora 
(Ford | Samsung | Matsushita | Qualcomm) 
Moving to Juarez. 
Getting a job in a maquiladora. 
Being a woman. 
Getting raped 
by a serial killer 
or a death squad. 
Copy cat. Quote. 
(800 women have felt that 
in the last 10 years 
in Juarez) 
Becoming a body. 
And then being found 
in an empty lot 
in the outskirts of the city 
with a torn t-shirt 
that says: 
“California. 
The Golden State.” 
28 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Feeling stressed. 
Experiencing our body 
Thanks 
‘To the Sickness 
The New World Order 
Gave Us: 
Stress. 
We, 

Going to Tijuana. 
Because ‘Tijuana is 
(according to ‘The Simpsons) 
The happiest place on Earth. 
And it is the maquiladora town 
Where 75 percent 
Of all television sets 
Are produced. 
It is also the most crossed border in the world, and the 
place where thousands of Americans hang out every weekend, the 
place where: 
a) They have Fun 
b) Feel beautiful and loved 
and c) In control. 
(Mexico is the place where Americans feel they really are 
“Americans.”) 
30 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Using 
Language exchange rates 
(Body Surplus) 
Violence is the American Way (A quote) 
Violence is the American Way (A quote) 
And we cannot help but to be Americans in that sense. 
We are all Americans now 
(even the French). 
31 

Being a man. 
Moving to the border. 
Finding a pollero. 
Waiting for the right moment 
to illegally cross. 
No helicopters around. 
No trucks. 
Walking. 
Hating the sun. 
Being a man. 
Moving to the border. 
Finding a pollero. 
Walking [to what’s called the Other Side]. 
And then, getting beaten 
by some American INS Agent 
Who needs to feel his body 
as the body of a Real Man. 
32 

Fearing 
Another attack. 
That’s also 
Another step 
‘To remembering 
We still have 
A body 
Left. 
33 TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 

10. 
(The pleasure.) 
(Through the pleasure) 
The pleasure of uploading 
into the Internet 
Uploading 
Without our bodies 
(The Relief) 
The relief of entering 
Cyberspace 
(The Final 
Common Place) 
Uploading ourselves 
into the Internet 
Without our bodies. 
Our bodies that hurt so much 
And viewing 
And buying 
With credit cards the image 
(just the image) 
(of the bodies) 
(of the bodies of the others). 
Restrictions apply. 
34 

A Song from and to 
the Native Informant 

[Music, Maestro! ] 
Don’t you realize? 4) /] 
You will 
become «J #1 
a 
cultural 
broker -] 2] 
What 
do 
~N 
you have? +) ¢] 
What are 
you going +] 
to offer 
us? 4) 4} 
A cultural broker -) -) TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Oy, 

Loving 
Lobbying 
Sounds 4) -) 
Beauty is 
what empire 
does /) 4] 
A cultural broker! 
38 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
2. AND NOW STOP THE MUSIC, KIDS 
Because I need your attention 
and I’m going to tell you 
how to keep the Nezahualcoyotl dance-chant down. 
I’m sorry to tell you 
I may destroy myths 
—said the American 
Nahuatl 
maestro-professor—: 
Nezahualcoyotl just means 
“hungry coyote” 
and nothing else. 
But don’t 
you think 
—somebody 
replied — 
“Nezahualcoyotl” 
might have 
a spiritual 
bent 
since it means fasting-coyote? 
“Coyote” as a symbol of someone 
using spiritual methods 
to turn himself 
into a higher kind of animal. 
No, you need to 
remember 
the Aztecs 
were very much 
sardonic 
2) 

And 
“Nezahualcoyotl” 
just means 
hungry coyote. 
Iam here 
to teach you 
Nahuatl grammar 
and how not to be 
caught 
in ideological stuff. 
So let’s avoid words 
that might 
fuel 
feelings 
of 
anti 
imperial 
revolt. 
40 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
3. THE NATIVE SITS DOWN AND KEEPS LISTENING 
‘Take your place, dear Native Informant 
and listen carefully: 
GLOBAL 
is the new upper class! 
So are you 
Good Global 
or 
Bad Global? 
That's where everything starts. 
These are the criteria: 
If you live under global conditions 
But don’t exhibit aesthetic signs of at least 3 GloCal- 
ifornian cultural consumptions 
then 
You are just national. 
In order to be GLOWBAL 
You need to consume or work 
In two countries 
And if you're a migrant 
still think about staying 
In the least cool one. 
“Global” is the new 
“UNIVERSAL.” 
But—as you should remember— 
There are some who are more UNIVERSAL 
Than others. 
Al 

Be one of them! BE GLOWBAL! 
Hybrid? 
Did you say hybrid? 
Hungry! You imbecile! Hungry, not hybrid! 
Global is mainly the hungry, not the starlet 
Hybrid 
Hungry! Hungry! Hungry! 
And very angry! 
Desertification 
Is the main logic 
Of global market 
Not the all-encompassing 
Attractive 
Rich, Remixed & 
Beautiful, Sexy, Paratactic Gift 
Of Hybrid-logics 
Global means those who can help my career 
Virgin Postmodern subjects of study 
And 
You are just not savage enough! 
You need to get your act together. 
Or return 
to homeland. 
You, Desert Global, 
You, just 
hungry coyote. 
42 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
4. | NEED (THEN) AN AMERICAN VOICE (A SONG) 
Can somebody 
appropriate 
me 
please 
? 
Kenny! 
Can 
I 
be 
nd YOUTSSSSSS? *. *« 
~ Sh 
Can I be yours? +) «) 
Kenny! 
Can 
I 
be 
... BEFORE 
WE 
co... 41 4 
43 

AND FINALLY 5. 
A SONG FOR MY MASTER. DISAPPROPRIATION IT’S CALLED ) -] 
I want 
to give you 
all 
[have ) 
In my body 
there are feelings 
coming out 
of colonial times 4] /) 
I want 
to give you 
all I have 2] 
To surrender 
all the precious 
information 
Ihave 2) 2) 
I feel 
a pressure 
to tell all 
the treasures 
we have 4) 4] 
I become 
happy 
when your 
face 
appreciates 
all we have ?) 4) 
44 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Because 
you are my lord 
you deserve all 2) 7] 
You have better uses 
for whatever 
as 
we have ¢] 4) 
Dis 
possession 
is in 
my 
heart 4) 4] 
Colonial feelings 
is 
all 
I 
have ) ¢) 
45 

from Ethopoetics 
(SOME VARIATIONS) 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
What kind of poet 
Can you make 
OUT 
OF 
The poet 
You were made 
INTO? 
49 

Wars | HAVEN’T SEEN 
WARS NOW WITHIN ME 
50 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Poetry is othering oneself 
& being uttered by another 
is to produce SOCIAL alterity. 
is to PRODUCE POSSIBLE POLIS, i.€., POETRY. 
51 

Suppose this poem has as epigraph 
Rilke’s famous last line (from “Archaic 
‘Torso of Apollo”) which says: 
“You must change your life.” 
And suppose this poem 
Includes big statements 
On life-changing ideas or events 
In order to put myself in the same 
Line of Western wise men. 
And through the cryptoreligious setting aroused 
By sound effects and verbal arrangement 
The reader sits with us 
On this ideological music of the spheres. 
And obviously dismisses 
The deeper problem 
Posed by Rilke’s poem. 
Or I could change his verse 
And play with it in different ways 
Following procedures now 
Well established in the experimental 
Network. 
Or I could go outside 
Poetry’s time-space 
And take therapy 
Or have a new career. 
But none of these 
Would 
52 

Seriously respond 
To Rilke. 
“You must change your life” 
Remains 
An invitation for 
A new science of poetics 
To occur, a science 
On how writing relates 
To particular methodologies 
Of life-change 
In individuals and groups 
Who exchange texts. TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
53 

Art is part of domination. 
Poets personally suffer 
The introjection of multiple dominations. 
Artists have been historically neurotic. 
The end of art is not becoming therapy. 
Cure may just be a good subversive departure point 
For other kinds of art. 
54 

man 
is 
the 
greatest 
work 
of 
not 
yet 
developed 
and probably 
“man” 
and 
at 
are 
the 
obstacles 
for 
the 
work 
to 
be 
done TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
55 

What kind of citizenship 
(for example) 
does North American 
experimental 
poetics 
produce? 
56 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Which human aspects 
does 
contemporary poetry 
enhance shield ? 
When does conceptualism become 
retrorationalism 
neo-neopositivism 
emotionally detached 
cool co-control? 
Is AGAINST EXPRESSION 
prorepression? 
And what about experimental superego? 
Dy; 

War modifies eyes and arms. 
Pollock’s dripping 
Mill “dripping,” really? 
Is also how painting art ANAESTHETICS 
lyricized DROPPING missiles. 
exorcized From Plato to collage. 
beautified 
: TO NOT FEEL WAR. 
How Rothko 
eloritied 
totem light 
atom bomb 
58 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
10. 
There’s 
always 
an ethopoetics 
involved 
in “writing” 
but not 
necessarily 
always 
a “writer” 
aware 
of 
ethopoetics. 
And that’s where WAR 
Takes charge of historic performances of bodies. 
War 
Our automatic response, yes, 
The structures of war, 
Bestow us, wars, immediate feedback. 
There is one law: 
Recent wars 
Will produce 
Future 
Forms. 
59 

11. 
The history of Western art and writing 
can be performed through the word 
Catharsis 
catharsis as a purging of emotions 
. catharsis as a translation of conventional emotions into higher 
is aesthetic 
. is ethopoetic 
a. happens to spectator 
b. —IS SPECTACLE 
c. is carried out by artist ethopoet 
involves repression, projection, identification 
1s pathopeia — a journey through “passions just as they are” 
. involves pathetics: developing a new 
PATHos / emotional landscape 
“without fear of the other 
60 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
14s 
THE ANSWER TO THE QUESTION 
How 
has poetry 
actually 
contributed 
to the transformation of humankind 
IS WHAT 
POETRY ACTUALLY IS 
61 

13: 
Imagining a language 
Means imagining a form 
Of life 
Writes Wittgenstein 
Who probably didn’t rewrite his life 
Enough. 
If language games 
Only mean 
When they make situations 
Possible 
One question is this: 
What situations are we 
Making possible 
Through our postlanguage 
Games? 
62 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
14. 
When sitting and feeling the wind coming 
Through the trees 
Outside I think 
What is the relationship 
Between the Poetry Foundation 
& the CIA 
‘Today? 
The cia shaped 
The Writers’ Workshops 
That shaped you. 
Is there a shape 
Capable of thinking THIS 
Without being a shape shaped 
By the cia? 
The wind blows through the trees. 
Poetry and the cia have a history. 
63 

15, 
| Post|Gulf War Poetics. 
American government 
, oil 
Conceptual poets 
text 
How [to] appropriate 
E+V+E+R+Y+T+H+I+N+G 
64 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
16. 
If Neruda was assassinated 
Through a lethal injection in the stomach 
It was the Chilean government. 
And if it was the Chilean government 
Who assassinated Neruda 
It was the North American government. 
Pinochet is Another. 
Another means CIA. 
The Chilean 9-11 coup d’état hit 
Neruda’s stomach. 
The imperial syringe 
Poisoned poetry’s tissues 
from North to South. 
And if it was the cia dictatorship 
Who assassinated 
th The greatest poet of the 20'" Century, 
What kind of poet were you 
de facto made into? 
And what kind of poet 
must you become in knowing 
the cra dictatorship killed Neruda? 
65 

17. 
disCONTENT struggles with FORM. 
FORM represses social struggles. 
FORM is designed to prevent expression 
of vulgar popular explosive unwelcomed forces. 
FORM will always be on the side of the enemy. 
As poets, here we are, on the wrong side. 
Poets, look around, you are surrounded 
by FoRm’s defense forces. 
Forget about FORM 
66 

18. TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
will be the last empire 
67 

Poetry in a Time of Crisis 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
First | would like to say two things: 
One, I believe poetry exclusively occurs when it is discussed [i.e. 
“Poetry” as a privileged structure is an anachronistic notion. I can only 
stand poetry in the context of prose]. 
Two, Americans should leave Afghanistan and Iraq so writers and 
clerks can move to more boring topics. 
I've learned something over the years. [1 noticed how my English 
derives from clichés, as if I was writing from the debris; what Eileen 
Myles said at the conference after telling her story about reading in 
English in Russia and the reaction of the audience, “Writing with a 
filthy language.” | 
“If I’ve learned something over the years.” ‘The instant we're talking 
about crisis we are hidings ours. 
(‘This comes from my Mexican background and my training in 
Gestalt psychotherapy; the projections we make; how to recuperate 
those projections in order to reorganize the self; to not impose them 
on the world. It also comes from Guangfan’s “There is nothing in 
the whole universe that is not you”; the basic Upanishad teaching 
“Thou are you” and Hegel’s comment at his Phenomenology of Spirit 
regarding philosophy starting only once we recognized ourselves in/ 
with the absolute other. Mexican popular culture says: “No te hagas 
pato” (lit. don’t make yourself a duck, meaning, don’t pretend you 
are not you, don’t turn into a third person in order to not assume the 
71 

responsibilities of knowing you are the person you accuse, don’t become 
3 in order to not accept you are both 1 and 2]. 
I take “crisis” as a crisis I too am provoking. At the same time the 
victim and the agent of imperialism in every case. Something I share 
with Americans. 
Iraq, for example, is Bush’s way to hide he is the crisis itself. 
Bush is our way to hide we are Bush. 
It’s easy to blame governments when they in fact do represent awful 
societies. 
I can only call poetry the most critical voice against every order, 
including its own. 
I suspect as poets we take advantage of times of crisis to try to offer 
poetry as part of the solution. Maybe to hide poetry as part of the problem. 
In saying “Poetry in a time of crisis” I certified poetry. 
I certified it as part of a time. 
As part of a time of crisis, which is something really good for poetry. 
Poetry in a time of crisis must be useful. At least in that phrase. 
That phrase is optimistic. 
It makes poetry look good. 
Part of the solution. Not part of the problem. 
But | think poetry is part of the problem. 
In a way Bush does poetry too. 
I may say his poetry is pretty bad but it’s poetry too. 
Bush tries to cling to meaning. He tries to make the audience feel the 
ecstasy of words. He performs. 
The president behaves similarly to poets I know. 
I am now doing what Bush does much better than me. 
No wonder poets decide to be poets. They become Bush. 
There’s only one step from the blank page to the White House. I’m 
in it. 
Tam Bush. 
Poetry in a time of crisis can also mean poetry is an emergency measure. 
Poetry as something you reuse or return to when things get worst. 
For example, if you're depressed. Or there’s a war down there in Iraq. 
You can make an anthology out of emergency poetry like this. 
Poetry is part of the problem. 
72 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Emergency measures follow a psychology of panic. 
Red or yellow alerts. 
Put some poetry into the dying nation, into the dying discourse. 
Poetry in a time of crisis. Poetry in yellow alert. Or red. 
How can poetry help? 
Somebody may offer this clue: poetry can help by not getting in 
the way. For example promoting the end of speeches. A country where 
every politician that tries to give a speech—especially a speech to the 
nation —is killed. 
[I liked Walter Lew’s approach, “talking again” about Spirit as 
something you need before doing poetry. And after. No spirit, no 
poetry. What he meant by “Spirit” I think was the beyond-deep- 
cultures-are. | 
Yet that clue would only be a pretty bad joke. 
The way poetry does not help. 
It’s not part of the solution but just part of the laughter. 
Mexico and the United States are nations that resemble each other 
too much. They should be completely different, so different that they 
should go to war every two or three months. Instead they go to bed 
every four years. 
Countries that laugh too much. Part of the problem is laughter. 
How come you laugh when a political joke is done? 
Why SNL? 
How did we get to this point? 
Because poetry worked. 
What poetry aims at, building the common I, the Nosotros, the We 
/ was achieved. 
Homer wanted to praise the heroes. He did. The heroes were praised. 
Whitman sang America. He achieved his goal. 
Poetry is full of successes. 
Poetry has been historically linked to war. 
Poetry is always trying to put an end to a war that continues wars 
that poetry helped to instigate. 
Whitman is full of bullshit American poetry hasn’t gotten rid of. 
Whitman was very American. Free verse means having no meters. 
No limits. Respecting no borders. I'ree verse breaks the territories, 
75 

makes it bigger. Free verse was how poetry materialized on the page 
the imperialism of the United States. Why being American was the 
best thing that could happen to the rest of the continent. 
Free verse explains how Mexico was robbed of half its territory 
through a takeover, an expansion of the map of the United States. 
In fact, Whitman supported that war. 
Whitman wanted to construct a space-time where/when everything 
fit. That’s why Whitman broke the conventions of how much text 
could be written, how long the line could be. That’s why Whitman 
wrote so much. Wrote those heroic lists, those listings. Groceries of 
History. The many landscapes. The different peoples. Every thing: 
America. 
[I am here trying to start a discussion on how from Whitman to 
Stein, the way “America” writes reflects/refracts the imperialism this 
writing is developing under, developing in its own structures. Acker 
would have agreed on this I think. | 
So, from this point on we are going to call “America” the image of a 
space-time where/when everything is there/then. The containment of 
All. What Pound called “Vortex” and Borges “Aleph.” 
What we forget conceiving such a total-time/space is that a system 
of simultaneous realities taking place at once would make all of 
them absurd. 
“America” is a comical nightmare. 
Viewing poetry in a time of crisis doesn’t help to put an end to 
the crisis, it only helps to make poetry (again) a possible solution, a 
praxis that can really mean something good for the culture it belongs 
to; viewing poetry in a time of crisis puts the emphasis on the time of 
crisis, erases the fact that the institution of poetry is part of the crisis, 
that poetry is in a crisis itself. 
[My reading of Efrafn Huerta, Nicanor Parra, Renato Leduc, 
etc. gave me these ideas from the start: we received literary “poetry” 
from the Western tradition, at one point we dominated that and even 
contributed our own thing to It, but let’s not forget “poetry” is part 
of the Western colonial heritage, a post-colonial self-critique stance 
implies a going beyond “poetry.” | 
Times of crisis help poetry hide its own crisis. | think instead of 
74 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
thinking how poetry can help in a time of crisis, think how poetry has 
collaborated for the production of a crisis, how that production of a 
crisis makes a culture risk itself, and thus having to strengthen the 
strategies to perpetuate itself using the institution of crisis as an excuse. 
To make poetry a possible measure. ‘To make ourselves forget we 
live in cultures that are dying, cultures that want to kill. 
I think poetry is part of the obscurity. 
I think poetry is the place where people go when they want to miss 
therapy. 
The place people go when they are too snob to go to the movies but 
they still want to pretend their life can have meaning as their moon, an 
elevator to acquire more power or at least meet the readers. 
The readers, that group of people who want the same stuff poets 
crave for, but don’t have the courage even to write. 
Or to corrupt themselves in order to publish. 
What I am saying is I don’t believe poetry can be fixed. 
Nor do I believe poetry should be saved. 
(How much more I would have enjoyed g-11 if the twin towers had 
been full, completely packed, with poetry books.) 
I think Wittgenstein was right when he realized he should 
concentrate on proving philosophy could do basically nothing. 
When crises arise I’m one of those people that think words can 
help prevent the catastrophe. This is one of the reasons I consider 
myself a poet. I believe in alerts. I’m part of the problem. 
Poetry should not look for ways to survive. But the poet, at least, 
should make an effort to disclose all the information she or he has 
historically used to gain authority. 
Even a dying cultural practice like poetry can be more honest than 
usual politics. 
Poetry should unveil where its authority comes from. Should push 
its own contradictions, let them come out of the closet. Should push 
the crisis further until the authorities that created it to remain in power 
are removed by the continuation of the crisis, until nothing remains. 
I came from all the way from Mexico, stood in a line, asked for a 
is 

permit, said hi to American Immigration agents, lied in the airport, ate 
peanuts, had a ride, I came all the way from Mexico to basically accept 
I have nothing to say. 
I only come here to do what I think poets should do every 
opportunity they have: contradict ourselves all we can right in front of 
the audience we once tried to convince poetry was something good, 
something we should share, something that helped. Publicly and very 
openly contradict ourselves until the laughter stops, until there’s no 
credibility left in the authority we inherit or won ourselves, until it is 
made clear those who have authority have stolen it. 
‘The function of poetry is to lose its function. The function of poetry 
is to diminish the general notion of authority. 
76 

Bad Tripping the 
White Dream Poem 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
June 2015's issue of Poetry journal published “Beatitudes Visuales 
Mexicanas” by Lawrence Ferlinghetti. The piece is a series of journal 
entries — dated October-November 1975 —containing poetic neo- 
memories about a Mexican journey done by Ferlinghetti. The timing 
of this publication was a huge bad trip. 
This publication shows how out of touch with non-North American 
communities many North American authors and editors can be even 
in moments when discussions about race are shaking the trans-national 
experimental literary field. 
As a Tijuana writer both left of the Mexico City literary hegemony and 
North American experimental circles, | only have two options after 
reading Ferlinghetti’s piece. I can either let it go as one more (one 
more!) piece by a North American poet telling us how Olsonian he is 
Down There in Mexico or put in writing why such North American 
lyrical fantasies are totally anachronistic and unacceptable today both 
in the South and the North. 
In the following electronic performance paper I will first try to show 
how empire writes beautiful poetry and then I will show how showing 
empire writes beautiful poetry cannot be accomplished in the form of 
the sane essay. 
We 

At some point during this piece I may abandon common sense and 
most Reason. Reason is the way empire messes with your mind but not 
the way we experience empire. Reasonable essays are just as colonial 
(colonizing) as Hurocentric poetry. 
I will begin calling our attention to the date and title of Mr. 
Ferlinghetti’s piece. (Please imagine you are seeing a powerpoint slide 
every time I quote Ferlinghetti and then imagine me speaking, not 
reading but speaking after each citation). 
First I want to say something about the date: 
“October-November 1975” 
By publishing this in 2015 under a 1975 date, the piece is conferred 
a sense of being a “historical” document, the unfolding of a “real 
testimony,” a poetic essentialist ethnography about “Mexico” from the 
point of view of a North American innovative white poet. 
“Beatitudes Visuales Mexicanas” (“Mexican visual beatitudes.”) 
This is how Ferlinghetti’s piece is titled. 
“Beatitudes” alludes to this North American poet's insistence on his 
literary affliation and his validity today. It also adds a non-secular aura 
to the work. 
Exactly why these are “visual” notes or why they are “Mexican” is not 
clear at all. The beatitudes part, again, is clear: it is asking the reader to 
feel these notes come from a saint-poet, a poet familiar to Heaven. 
And because North American poets from this period try to resemble 
Jesus Christ, imagining the Poet as Celestial is easy for most readers. 
Poets initiate them into the Light [coming from empire]. “La Luz del 
Mundo,” as entry number | says: 
80 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
“Bus to Veracruz via Puebla + Xalapa ... Adobe house by highway, with 
no roof and one wall, covered with words: la luz del mundo.” 
And then after reading the first three annotations, you understand you 
are reading exoticizing literary journal entries by a North American 
poet-saint-tourist who thinks too highly of his own clichés. But then a 
“White god” appears at the center of the “Mexican” landscape: 
“Halfway to Xalapa a great white volcano snow peak looms up above 
the hot altiplano — White god haunting Indian dreams.” 
“White god,” ok, Mr. Ferlinghetti, I get you. “White god haunting 
Indian dreams.” Which translated into decolonial English means the 
White god poet here is dreaming of Indian bodies dreaming of a White 
god. So the question is why does the North American neoromantic 
(beat) poet need to dream about that? 
If Ferlinghetti was totally aware of what he was writing in 1975 and 
aware of what he was publishing in 2015, the answer is that he has 
Eurocentric dreams about the Mexican-other (“Indians”). But my 
hypothesis is that Ferlinghetti was not completely aware of what he was 
writing then and is publishing now, as the writing shows: this series 
of notes are writing themselves and writing (reinscribing) the North 
American poetic subject as he romantically inferiorizes “Mexico.” 
Ferlinghetti’s piece is the one dreaming of the “White god,” and as 
part of this dream, North American white-writing dreams Ferlinghetti 
himself. And the “Indians” are just psychopolitical projections of this 
complex lyrical subject. 
(For practical purposes, | will call this military-complex lyrical subject 
here “Ferlinghetti.” But Ferlinghetti is not just Ferlinghetti). 
Ferlinghetti is basically writing his Mexican journal (and Poetry 
journal basically is publishing it) under the influence of imperial 
substances. This is fundamentally a case of imperial possession. 
81 

And soon after its beginning, Ferlinghetti’s angelic gaze cannot stop 
itself from falling victim-victimizer of all the clichés from the White 
Racist Book About the Mexican Dead (including the “burros”): 
“A boy and three burros run across a stubble field, away from the white 
mountain. He holds a stick. ‘There is no other way.” 
The “White god haunting Indian dreams” here replays itself in the 
form of a “white mountain,” which takes Hegemonic Whiteness from 
Heaven to Earth, spreading it onto the landscape and immediately 
telling the boy and the three burros “There is no other way.” 
But there is another way. There are a lot of other ways, Mr. 
Ferlinghetti. It’s just that you need to question your own authority as a 
North American white male high saint lyrical subject. 
The piece continues: “Deep yellow flowers in the dusk by the road, 
beds of them stretching away into darkness. A moon the same color 
comes up.” 
Notice how by now, his representation of sublime nature has absorbed 
the White god mythology, and displays itself as a simultaneity of “deep 
yellow flowers” and a “moon the same color” (coming up). This is a 
sort of Zen poem used to say the lower and the upper worlds obey the 
same set of light-colored cosmic laws. This is how empire sings, how 
it sings while it encroaches itself into nature, and ultimately how one 
older imperial poetics serves a younger. 
By now, of course, most readers will fall into imperial poetic arrest very 
nicely, because the operation has been seductively carried out and 
Western civilization simply does not educate its citizens to disengage 
themselves from imperial poetics. Bodies react and love the Poet's words. 
But, Mr. Poet, | know what you are doing. Iam a poet too. And I too 
sing “America” against my will. And now I am inside of your poem, “ + ” . 
because “America” has swallowed the entire world, and we are not 
82 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
sure if “Mexico” is real anymore, but I was told that in Your Poem my 
fatherland and my mothertongue are living now. But I don’t see them, 
Mr. Poet, I just see a delusion by a White god. 
And you and me are inside this delusion. This is why I am writing in 
English (and not you writing in Spanish). ‘This is why I came to North 
American poetics (and not you to Latin American poetics). Because 
you are in charge and we are tired. Some of us need to come and blow 
up this white North American delusion. 
See that yellow bright in the night sky, Mr. White Poet-god? Well, that’s 
your fucking yellow moon and your fucking White god exploding. 
And the prose poem or whateva continues: 
“As the bus turns + turns down the winding hill, moon swings wildly 
from side to side. It has had too many pathetic phalluses written about 
it to stand still for one more.” 
But then why are you making us stand still for more North American 
pathetic phalluses? 
Ok, let me guess.... You want us to listen to you telling us all this 
ecopoetic dogshit because here it comes! Here comes your next grand 
self-portrait down there in Mexxxi Co.: 
“In Xalapa I am a head taller than anyone else in town—A foot of flesh 
and two languages separate us.” 
Oh, so you indeed are the White Mountain-god? How great of you, 
Mr. Ferlinghetti, so handsome and tall, to separate from us, but before 
you go on with your sweet hegemonic demonic lyrical quickie attack, 
let’s clarify something: it is not a foot of flesh and two languages 
that separate us, but five centuries of renewable colonial affects and 
monolingualism. 
83 

And by now, we can also see how the White Poet is insisting so much 
in putting himself in the upper world (“Iam a head taller than anyone 
else in town...”), so thanks to you and your great merciful powers we 
know we are in the lower level, thank you very much, and now let me 
continue in the hot altiplano, with my three burro-amigos and the 
certainty (conferred by The Almighty) that “There is no other way.” 
But before I start crying under a palm tree and start drinking the 
coconuts and then the tequila and finally fall asleep wrapped in a 
tortilla under my big sombrero until the zopilotes eat me during the 
Day of the Dead, let me quote you once more: 
“At a stand in the park at the center of Xalapa I eat white corn on the 
cob with a stick in the end, sprinkled with salt, butter, grated cheese 
+ hot sauce. The dark stone Indian who hands it to me has been 
standing there three thousand years.” 
You really like sticks, right? Don’t you think that so many sticks are 
saying something about the pathetic phalluses? And why are you 
dreaming that the “small” man raising his hand to try to reach your 
Highness is a “dark stone Indian”? Why do you need to see non- 
human dark stones instead of human foreign-inferiorized-brown 
bodies? And why do you fantasize him as having three thousand years? 
This is 2015, Mr. White Poet, don’t patronize your readers and don’t 
inferiorize and primitivize Mexican bodies. We are really tired of this. 
D. H. Lawrence already did it a century ago and we don’t want to read 
one more Lawrence Mexplaining us again. 
Please remember this has been happening for more than 500 years 
(do you realize how much your “Mexican” notes resemble Hernan 
Cortés’ letters?; the similarities are revealing, please read that), yes, for 
5 fucking hundred years, but none of us has been here for the entire 
500 years, each of us has died at 57, 14 and many at 3 or 9, so for you 
to tell us some of us are a three thousand year old dark stone handing 
you (Up There) some “white corn” is really insulting today, this 
84 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
kind of poetry is totally exhausted, offensive, absurd, openly imperial 
(also) today. Maybe some decades ago it was cool, countercultural or 
something, but now is totally unacceptable. 
What? Are you saying I’m mad? Yes, I’m mad, I am angry! And what is 
your response? What? What are you saying now? 
“Tm taking this trip from Mexico City to the Gulf of Mexico and back 
without any bag or person—only what I can carry in my pockets. The 
need for baggage is a form of insecurity.” 
What? 
What? 
No, this is your mystical arrogance, your total psychic colonial 
inflation and your colonial baggage saying this. It’s because you were a 
North American upper-hippie poet-editor travelling to Mexico that you 
were able to do that. The Mexican working class that used buses then 
and still uses them now do carry baggage because they are not North 
American upper-hippie poet-editors travelling to Mexico who can 
enjoy the privilege of bragging only the insecure need baggage. 
I hope that by now you and your White Poet Friends understand some 
of us in the “underworld” are not going to take even one more line of 
your “Mexican” imperial poetics. 
“Two hours in this town and I feel I might live forever (foreign places 
affect me that way). The tall church tower tolls its antique sign: pray.” 
Yes, of course, foreign places affect you in “that way.” This happens 
because your body was trained in the us to feel hubris before brown 
bodies. Souths make you horny. Souths make you Godly. 
Souths make you Who You Are. 
85 

That is why in your aphorisms or whateva you are reporting feelings 
of Greatness, Universality, and Eternity and your brain is producing 
poetic imagery in which your inflated Self is equated to a “tall church 
tower” that “tolls its antique sign: pray.” 
Pray? 
Do you realize how colonial this is? How incredibly colonial it is to 
say “Oh this “Mexican” TALL church tower tells us (and especially you 
Mexican/Indians): pray.” 
Pray? 
“Pray” is not an “antique sign” but the Spanish Christian Colonial 
sign you are identifying with. The colonizer ideology you as poet have 
inherited. 
One older imperial poetics serving a younger. 
The Spanish Empire is one of the specters feeding the North 
American Empire. And its poets. 
“In early morning in the great garden of Xalapa, with its terraces 
and immense jacaranda trees, pines + palms, there are black birds 
with cries like bells, and others with hollow wooden voices like 
gourds knocked together. The great white volcano shimmers far off, 
unreached by the rising sun.” 
When you talk about those birds, who are you really talking about? O 
those birds are all over Colonial Poetics. And some of us know who 
those birds are. 
“The great white volcano...unreached by the rising sun,” yeah, 
whateva, we get it, you, the White god, the white mountain, the white 
volcano, so great, so high, so unreachable, whateva, Mr., you Te just 
having colonial dreams, co-lo-nial dreams, this is what most North 
86 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
American poetry is about, what most Western Poetry is about, what 
most Poetry is about, fuck it. 
Don’t worry. We are almost saying goodbye. We will be in this bus 
together just a few more minutes. I just need to quote you a couple 
of times more to show how North American poetry systematically 
produces colonial golden shit. 
“Brown men in white palmetto cowboy hats stand about the fountains 
in groups of three or four, their voices lost to the hollow-sounding 
birds. Along a sunlit white stone balustrade, student lovers are studying 
each other, novios awaiting the day. The sun beats down hot and melts 
not the mountain.” 
No, of course not the mountain. No, how could the sun melt the 
White Mountain? No, of course not, how delirious of us to think The 
White Mountain is Not Eternal. 
“On the bus again to Veracruz, dropping down fast to flat coast. A 
tropical feeling — suddenly coffee plantation + palms—everything 
small except the landscape, horses the size of burros, small black 
avocados, small strong men with machetes each still saying to himself 
Me llamo yo.” 
“Everything small except the landscape,” oh, my White God, I see you 
have been playing too much with the stick, right? Too much colonial 
masturbation, man, too much “you are so small, you and everything 
are small, except Me and the Landscape, everything else is the size of 
burros and small avocados, even the small strong men with machetes, 
each still saying —after three thousands years of stone primitive 
existence —‘Me llamo yo.” 
Me llamo yo? What? My name is I? I’m called me? Why do you 
need to end your bus “Mexican” ride with a chorus of small strong 
“Mexican” men with machetes saying this nonsense? Me llamo yo, Me 
llamo yo, Me llamo yo, what? 
87 

Now let me tell you and the Poetry journal editors something: the 
appearance of this piece precisely in June 2015, a few days before the 
Berkeley Poetry Conference and right in the middle of the crisis of 
North American experimentalism represents another event of imperial 
synchronicity. 
And it’s about imperial nostalgia. The us empire is crumbling and 
similarly to how Kenneth Goldsmith and Vanessa Place are all about 
nostalgia for crumbling White Supremacy, we are going to witness all 
kinds of poetic events from whites and white allies trying to hold on to 
the melting empire. 
This is stereotypical nostalgic white-countercultural Americana. 
This is totally Whitmaniac, totally Poundian, totally Steinian, totally 
Olsonian, totally Beatnik, totally Conceptualist, totally Il Gruppo, 
totally poetics still clinging to the imperial. 
This is about how North American poetics has historically decided 
to innovate poetry, to only renovate itself, obeying White Western 
Supremacist Values. 
Some central aspects of the North American lyrical subjects are 
constructed through conscious and unconscious (d)emotions of 
Being Larger than Others. Imperial Poetics is the spiritualization of 
Inequality. 
And this myth is directly involved in the formation of the North 
American lyrical ego and was particularly crucial for the formation 
of the New American Poets’ spirit, that’s why both Olson’s and the 
beatniks’ travels into Mexico fueled a whole period of North American 
innovative poetics. Their fantasies about Mexico consisted, on one 
hand, as a combination of colonizers identifying with elements of the 
colonized through (Romantic) mythology and, on the other, these 
same colonizers reiterating their superiority through intercultural 
poetic imagery. 
88 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Ferlinghetti’s 1975-2015 vintage “Mexican” postcards are just another 
version of the imperial poetic gaze dreaming about South of the 
Border inferior-worlds. And this is the 21 Century and we are still 
trapped inside this colonial pantopia, this mad imperial hubristic 
seizure. 
This mad imperial hubristic poetic seizure creates an upper gaze that 
looks down to Southern human and non-human bodies, and it does 
so in a beautiful lyrical manner. It is precisely through poetry that the 
imperial gaze is justified, sublimated, aestheticized. Beauty is what 
Empire Sees, what Empire Feels, what Empire thinks. Beauty is What 
Empire Senses. 
The White Poet-Mountain: The Poet as OverSeer. The Poet of 
Superiority. 
In my book Empire of Neomemory | questioned how Charles Olson’s 
imperial imaginary created pantopias, that is, spaces of poetized 
totalities under colonial control. 
And Pantopias are all about retromania, my friend. 
Now we have arrived to the end of our travel together. Let’s step 
outside this Greyhound. 
What do you see? 
No white gods, no white mountains. 
Yes, amigo, no white gods, no white mountains. Even this cold empire 
is melting. 
89 

On Imperial Poetics: 
BARAKA'SS DEFENSE OF OLSON 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
“...most recently Amiri has lent his support to I] Gruppo, a gathering 
of writers initially convened to debunk a recent book claiming that 
Charles Olson was an exemplar of us imperialism [some members 
of the audience laugh]...and that projective verse was based on a 
military paradigm, in that somewhat macabre light [some members of 
the audience laugh]...because Amiri actually published “Projective 
Verse,” meaning that if Olson is a big imperialist perhaps by association 
Amiri is a small one [some members of the audience laugh]...in that 
? 
macabre light, let us without further due give it up for Amiri Baraka...’ 
[8:40-9:15] 
Ammiel Alcalay’s introduction to Amiri Baraka 
‘th Charles Olson Lecture, Cape Ann Museum, October 19, 201 4 P 9 3 
https:/Avww.youtube.com/watch?v=O 1IhRvHoxcl 
93 

I’m the “dude” from Mexico 
“whatever his name is” 
—as you dismissed me, Baraka 
because my poet’s theory book 
explored how Charles Olson’s subjectivity 
had strong imperialist components. 
You and your audience can laugh 
all you want. ’'m Mexican. 
North Americans, of all colors, 
are State-trained to laugh at us. 
I have heard that laughter 
so many times 
I have managed to break 
some of its sounds down. 
I can now, for instance, hear the pain 
and the xenophobia co-giggling 
along with the arrogance and self-sufficiency 
of finding ridiculous any claim 
about the existence of imperialist poets 
in the usa. 
Hubristic laughter precedes us. 
But not history. 
When critique hit home 
you became counter-insurgent 
and welcomed the leukotropic smile. 
Anti-imperialistic self-criticism (opt-out). 
You too were Charles Olson. 
94 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
[Some members of the audience laugh| 
Laugh all you want (enjoy your teeth). 
Dismiss the anti-imperial critic 
if that helps with 
pretending Charles Olson’s specter 
is not haunting you. 
As if all those verses and paragraphs 
where Olson poeticizes imperiality did not exist. 
O dear Baraka, you too wanted us to think 
poetry’s eunoia 
erases poetry's servitude. 
Poets’ beautiful contradictions are engendered 
by cruel geopolitics. 
First you, Amiri, vowed to destroy 
the United States as you knew it, 
and then you ended up embracing 
the imperial harpoon, 
loving some inches of it. 
It is phallic violence replying to 
love of violence —it trapped you. 
Who in this colonial context is not Olson? 
Certainly not us. 
Baraka loved Olson. Not today, but someday 
this little history will say much more. 
The wound screaming inside 
Likes to threaten others—and unfolds in delight. 
Voice is mostly murder. 
95 

Vengeance will always turn you into authority. 
“Small imperialism,” said your xenophobic presenter 
in an accurate and macabre description 
of your relation to the Larger One. 
Unapologetic (historic) love of large things 
without mercy, large “SPACE.” 
How to say no to the ballistic 
force? How to refuse being propelled 
by the All Mighty Spirit Missile? ‘Tradition 
depends on the breath of the Lord. 
You—who so beautifully worked on behalf 
of the paranoid patriarchal machinery — 
how could you not hear 
the accompanying bullets? 
The projectiles and explosions 
participating in the plastic coproduction 
of emergent form (then and now)? 
How could you not see, hear, 
all the typewriters, presses, tape recorders, 
fast hands scribbling and ample chests 
working in accordance 
with the rhythms of the Republic? 
Love among warriors, heroic wedding vows 
did not let you hear more closely 
the inner workings of these subtler bombs. 
Where do you stop to breathe, you ask? 
Where war scares you 
Where war scores you 
Where war scars you 
That’s where you stop breathing, Amiri. 
Where the Line breaks. And the usa prevails. 
96 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
You still were so proud of “America,” right? 
You can hear the Big Pride 
when you clarify the usa: 
“it’s not a little island like England, you know...” 
[Some members of the audience laugh] 
“a huge place...” 
[12:36-12:39| 
And when you (again) publicly deny 
the validity of a foreign book on imperial poetics 
inside and outside the USA 
“...that dude who wrote that book on Mexico 
“whatever his name is 
“saying that Olson was imperialist 
“he just need to read this passage... 
[25:05] 
I’ve read it, Amiri. And don’t buy it. 
Even though your voice seems to believe 
the Man’s words. 
You were deluding yourself. 
Raising ideology high up.in arms 
and wanting us to celebrate it 
as a praiseworthy mirror. 
Sometimes, you were so full of it, Baraka. 
That’s why you got angry at the Mexican 
writing that Olson was imperialist. 
You, even more than others, 
were supposed to understand 
we all sing inside imperial structures. 
—But you probably remained 
97 

so deep in them 
or believed they only exist Out There. 
You could both sing against them so tremendously 
—suffering their attack — 
and on the other hand be even incapable 
of hearing or repeating 
a Mexican name. 
Empire distorts the senses. 
Empire is pain and rape. 
Violence, war, the father of All 
(according to that “eternal” source). Co-control. 
Love for Empire is the rubbish 
that divides 
those who should be comrades. 
And poetry, that weak 
and gripless double-edged sword 
we were able to pick up 
in this ruined time-space 
where aesthetic form 
still is an extension of war. 
98 

Uncertain Confession 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
If I access the other side of what is real 
I enter into an open field where 
My ancestors’ bodies 
Are piled up burnt 
And raped. Can I enjoy the leukotropic Meadow. 
Paradise 
White Poets’ 
‘To 
Fly 
Only if I 
And the metaphysical orchestra plays 
What for them are soothing songs 
That soon for us turn into screaming. And we run, run, 
run, 
run, 
Out of our 
Minds 
Wherein all images spring 
From unsettled 
Labor camps. 
Birth, and capitalism, and death. That’s all, that’s all, that’s all. 
101 

[ll be killed and you'll be bored. ‘That’s how colonial life works. 
‘Tradition is 
‘Terror And the voice 
Keeps telling me to stay Away 
From the threshold lam 
Not sure whose voice is Poetry for 
Us Is this uncertainty 
102 

The Opening of the 
(Transnational Battle) Field 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Concept plus its other, poetics 
Feels 
Like a program 
Poets’ theory is case-based wish-form 
Wish-faulted 
Caged-thinking 
Precarious prophecy 
Poetics 
Paper Prayer Pamphlet 
In a gathering of poets-professors wishing 
‘To exercise poetics-as-prefiguration 
I want to point at 
And 
Constellate 
The entanglement of revolution and coloniality 
(Re)animating 
The opening of the (transnational 
Battle) field 
105 

Pe 
William Burroughs, or, as he liked to called himself, el “Hombre 
Invisible,” went to Mexico in the middle of the last century, where 
he reported a fuller freedom. He wasn’t the only North American 
experimental writer that thought the “American Dream” was located 
in Mexico. Most famously, Olson and Kerouac had also Mexican 
episodes in the sos. 
Burroughs attributed the killing of his wife to the influence of an 
“Ugly Spirit” and described it as a “hateful parasitic occupation... a 
possession...a definite possessing entity” that he considered closer “to 
the medieval model than to modern psychological explanations, with 
their dogmatic insistence that such manifestations must come from 
within and never, never, never from without.”! 
There is strong evidence one key ingredient in the “Ugly Spirit” 
was Burroughs’ imperial contact with Southern cultures. The cutup of 
drugs, Northern experimental machismo, and Mexican urban culture 
triggered the formation of the “Ugly Spirit,” a language-centered 
psycho-somatic transnational entity. 
Now let us see how this ethopoetical process evolved. 
Goldsmith Goes Global. 
1. “Introduction,” Queer. New York: Penguin Books, 1987, xix. 
106 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Here we have Kenneth Goldsmith enjoying white control of global 
archives in the age of electronic inequality. ‘The photo was taken in 
Mexico City in 2013 by Marisol Rodriguez on the occasion of the 
“Printing Out the Internet” exhibition. 
This portrait shows how the “electronic revolution” (to use 
Burroughs’ viral words) helped this ethopoetic subject to avoid the 
formation of the “Ugly Spirit.” Goldsmith has co-created here (but not 
at Brown University) a scene where the hubristic macho xenophobic 
asymmetrical intercultural dominator self-expresses in cooler ways. 
Goldsmith’s pleasant day at the remediated beach was made 
possible by NAFTA, nonexistent at the time of Burroughs’ transnational 
crisis. Another element that eased Goldsmith’s status is the 
solidification of the “Colonial Library,” defined by the Bolivian poet- 
professor Silvia Rivera Cusicanqui as the “colonial appropriation” and 
management of centralized collections of Latin American primary and 
secondary sources by North American universities. 
Rivera Cusicanqui describes her experience at the “Colonial 
Library” as a series of “intense and contradictory emotions” running 
from “amazement to despair” and simultaneous “feelings of expansion 
of the intellectual horizon” and a “deep sense of frustration.” 
In order to talk about the “Colonial Library,” Rivera Cusicanqui 
says she needs both to reflect and feel. I return, then, to my point of 
departure: a poetics which is only concept reduces itself to rational, 
instrumental “Enlightenment.” Poetics should at least be CONCEPT 
plus its OTHER, and that is why I will further exit the “paper’-form for 
the remaining space-time available. 
2.“La biblioteca colonial.” Hambre de huelga. México: La mirada salvaje, 2014. 
107 

3: 
The Oneiro-NaFTA region desires 
An active transnational writing 
But this libidinal surge does not intend to abandon 
Monolingualism. It wants new markets, new archives 
‘To solve domestic crises. Appropriating and subsuming others — 
It’s still an expansionist-colonial desire. It’s /mpire 
(Mostly) white cultural elites ping-pong Capital Aesthetics 
Across the colonial axis. “Cosmopolitan” Eurocentric inertia 
Is transnationalism’s undercurrent. Another somatic 
‘Transnationalism comes from working class migrants 
Using more than one language and remaking culture 
outside law, “peace,” and citizenship. ‘The inventive 
is coming from these peoples 
Fights between transnationalisms will define 
Tomorrow’s poetries of risk. The question is not 
‘To be or not to be transnational but in which way? 
Today neoliberalism has refurbished 
Experimentalism into varieties of resilient job experience 
Neoliberal poetics doesn’t mean writers are sinners 
It means they are embedded 
Goldsmith’s old concept reframed 
Reaffirmed colonial structures at the other side 
Of Bill Clinton’s border fence. Goldsmith’s appropriation 
Of experimentalism strengthened official verse culture’s apolitical 
predisposition 
Upperclass aesthetic elegance and neutralization of leftist poetics 
Northern conceptualism proved to be counter-insurgent in the 
South—Also 
108 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Before and after the conceptual implosion 
Previous Latin American conceptualisms here and there 
Have been coopted, put at the service of the Master- 
Slave blood bank supply 
Where the conceptual slave enters the stage 
When the conceptual master grows weak 
‘Transnationalizing experimentalism does 
Not necessarily produce innovation 
Although the geopolitical gaze does endanger the spell 
Unexpectedly for the now dead Buddhist and anarchist spirit 
A la John Cage, neoliberal experimentalism 
May precisely be the driving force of its transnationalization 
Across the Americas today 
If setting patterns of aesthetic dissent 
Is one ingredient in the contradiction which is poetics 
We can try preventing the transnational from turning 
Into the most appealing ideology only if we remember 
The transnational is also a non-human agency and will 
‘Trump us 
I read Marx’s diagnosis of a “world-literature” along these lines 
Including his own Eurocentric-biopolitical pilot-plan 
If transnational poetics takes decolonial forms 
We might co-ignite change. As of now “experimentalism” 
Aestheticizes the leukotropic 
What tends toward “whiteness,” the so-called fine, rational, beautiful, cool 
Eunoian, harmonic, and superior 
And marginalizes the melantropic, the dark, disorderly, Cassiopeian 
Dangerous, deficient, vulgar, and inferior 
109 

Experimentalism chained itself to the leukotropic rules of D*E“S"1"G"N 
North American experimentalism mostly lives 
In denial on how its nation-centered procedures 
Have much to do with xenophobia, the job market and imperialism 
But as it encounters other innovative networks 
And traditions in the DysGlobal South 
Experimentalism will lose its national patriarchal and matriarchal 
Bodyguards and linear avant-garde master narrative 
Coming out of these struggles enriched by a state 
Of partial memory loss, archive fever, inappropriate 
Behavior, mistranslation, force displacement, and acute fragmentation 
The transnational could become the ultimate paratactic rearrangement 
Disabling poets to shape and reproduce themselves 
Through national entitlements 
Never ecological in relation to a larger geopoetics 
‘To separate experimentalism from national leukotropisms 
Is historically impossible. The (Neo)Avant-Garde 
And the Colonial Library are intertwined 
Only if experimentalism expands leukotropically can it survive 
Once post-national and post-experimental 
‘Take charge of new-writer’s bodies 
“Experimentalism” will not be the driving force of innovative poetics 
Currently, in ceasing to be an influential network, Language 
Poetry begins to fully operate as a tradition 
A militant participant in curated history 
A collective and disjointed body able to be reanimated 
And mobilized by other agents in other times and sites 
‘Today we imagine the transnational as spreading 
110 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
Through synchronic networks 
But the transnational also involves diachronic engagements 
With foreign lineages and discontinuous periods 
Disruption thus may occur through tradition-work 
We can’t say the revolution will be networked 
But we can be sure it will be fueled by archives 
‘Traditions in a transnational field of writing will not necessarily work 
As they do in national literatures, where they preserve legacies 
And erase alterities. At the transnational level, alien traditions may play 
A destructive role against other sets of masters 
Against intentions of non-expressiveness, Language 
And Post-Language white poetics will become problematic 
“Demons” for others 
Like Stein or Pound 
These demonic voices will probably creep 
Into cultures that do not hate speech 
Or deal with foreign colonial specters 
The transnational is all about demonology 
This revolutionary agency will increase 
In the case of powerful melantropic, underground, peripheral 
Indigenous, Black, mongrel, Non-Western traditions 
And networks only if they are radically decolonial 
In sum, transnational conditions already shape our writing 
And the lack of a transnational consciousness 
Allows Marx and Whitman’s 
Olson and Goldsmith’s ultramodernistic 
Expansionist projects to crystallize 
Our growing transnational desires 
Into the form of an irresistible COLONIAL REVOLUTIONARY seduction 
111 

All our poetic-epistemic desires occur inside the Colonial Library 
The transnational of the now-future 
Is being propelled and accelerated 
Through this COLONIAL REVOLUTIONARY program 
But some Souths desire to unrest the transnational 
And force the “experiment” 
‘To become a program of world revolution 
Without world coloniality 
112 

About Me: In English 

TRANSNATIONAL BATTLE FIELD 
I am possessed by the most powerful 
Revolutionary force in the world today: 
The Anti-American spirit. 
But I am written and I write in English 
I too sing America’s shit. 
I am inhabited by imperial feelings 
Which arise in my mind as images 
Of pre-industrial rivers 
Or take some technocratic screen-form. 
My hopes are these wounds 
Are also weapons. But they may be undead 
Scholarly jargon. 
I am colonized. I dream of decolonizing 
Myself and others. The images of the dream 
Do not match up. I am the body 
And the archive. 
A bomb is ticking in my old soul. 
And the life of the bomb 
115 

Writer and provocateur Hertberto-Yépez, 
called one of the best writers and chroniclers of 
“contemporary Mexico and one of the two most 
important literary minds writing in Mexico 
right now, as well as many other things (some 
unprintable). He lives in Tijuana. He writes 
in English when he confronts the US and in 
Spanish when he confronts Mexico. 
LO EDITIONS 
{ 
ac S Z 

| dain possessed by the most powertul 
Revolutionary force in the world today: 
The Anti-American spirit. 
But I am written and | write in English 
| too sing America’s shit. 
I am inhabited by imperial feelings 
Which arouse in my mind as images 
Of pre-industrial rivers 
Or take some technocratic screen-form. 
My hopes are these wounds 
Are also weapons. But they may be undead 
Scholarly jargon. 
Iam colonized. I dream of decolonize 
Myself and others. The images of the dream 
Do not match up. I am the body 
And the archive. 
A bomb is ticking in my old soul. 
And the life of the bomb 
‘Trembles in the hands of my new voice. 
I am a professor in the Third World. 
What do I know? Libraries in the North 
Do not open their doors. I laugh at myself 
Imagining what the newer books state. 
Writing is counter 
-insurgent. But the counter 
-Insurgency 
Leaders want our body 
Believing writing is freedom. 
This is as far as my English goes. 
COMMUNE EDITIONS 
PURVEYOR OF POETRY 
& OTHER ANTAGONISMS 
communeeditions.com ISBN-13: 978-19346392e21 
| | | 
OTE19S4 65922 1 TTT 

