When the 
Machine Made 
Art

776 – dc23
2013046891
ISBN: HB: 978-1-6235-6795-8
PB: 978-1-6235-6884-9
ePub: 978-1-6235-6272-4
ePDF: 978-1-6235-6561-9
Typeset by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
To Victoria and Vivienne
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments viii
 Introduction : Unorthodox 1
1 Future crashes 25
2 Coded aesthetics 65
3 Virtual renaissance 103
4 Frontier exploration 157
5 Critical impact 201
 Epilogue: Aftermath  249
Notes  268
Bibliography 305
Index 321
The research that provided the backbone to this book was 
conducted at two institutions on two continents. While pursuing 
scholarship in Australia and doing the same in the United States 
often differed in significant ways, the generous support of my 
colleagues remained the same. At the University of Western Australia 
in Perth, scholars such as Clarissa Ball, Patrick Beale, Richard 
Read, Nicole Sully, and Ian McLean provided helpful suggestions 
and challenged my thinking at every moment. At Lebanon Valley 
College in Annville, Pennsylvania, I received the same type of 
assistance—individuals with a critical focus willing to assist a 
colleague in completing a large research project. The members of 
the art and art history department—Karen Beall, Barbara McNulty, 
Dan Massad, and Michael Pittari—continually provided me with 
positive reinforcement. To Jeff Robbins, I owe special thanks. An 
ever-generous colleague, Jeff always gave sound professional and 
publishing advice. Other peers, including Marc Harris, Rebecca 
McCoy, Matthew Sayers, and Robert Valgenti, have provided 
various forms of aid: from language translations to best practices. 
Mike Green and the office of academic affairs also supported my 
endeavors with multiple research and travel grants. Becky Fullmer’s 
editorial work was instrumental in refining my manuscript. My LVC 
student assistants Diana Jo Hoffman and Lindsay Snowden were 
eager seekers of the most obscure and difficult reference materials. I 
would like to say Diana’s service dog Emmy helped, but the truth is 
she slept on my office floor while we toiled away. The librarian staff 
at the Bishop Library also deserve recognition for their remarkable 
attention to detail.
Within the global field of digital arts, I have numerous people to 
thank. Many of these individuals I first met at the inaugural Media 
Art Histories Conference in Banff, Canada, in 2005, and since 
then they have provided me with much-needed guidance and vital ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ix
research leads. These individuals include Darko Fritz, Charlie Gere, 
Douglas Kahn, Frieder Nake, Margit Rosen, and Eddie Shanken. 
Paul Brown, Hannah Higgins, and Nick Lambert have also 
supported my research at salient moments. I thank Jörgen Schäfer, 
along with the editorial board of the International Texts in Critical 
Media Aesthetics series, for bringing my narrative to light. Without 
the endorsement of Francisco Ricardo, founding editor of the series, 
this publication would not have been possible. I am grateful to the 
staff at Bloomsbury Publishing, especially my editors Katie Gallof 
and Laura Murray. I would also like to thank the Regents of the 
University of California and the University of California Press for 
allowing me to publish portions of my 2012 essay, “The Soulless 
Usurper: Reception and Criticism of Early Computer Art,” which 
was published in Mainframe Experimentalism: Early Digital 
Computing in the Experimental Arts  (edited by Hannah Higgins 
and Douglas Kahn).
I am particularly indebted to two individuals, Anne and Michael 
Spalter, who have provided unwavering support since the first 
moment I arrived in the United States. Anne has been an advocate of 
my research as far back as graduate school, and Michael introduced 
me to Hannah Higgins and Francisco Ricardo—individuals who 
opened up new scholarship paths for me. My correspondence with 
Laurens Schwartz became invaluable for both its counsel and its 
sense of friendship. One could say we formed a bond through layers 
of analogical expression. I am also appreciative of the countless 
artists who have invited me into their studios and homes. Viewing 
their artworks and searching their archives have provided continual 
sustenance for my intellect and imagination. Finally, I would like 
to thank my family in the United States and Australia, for without 
their emotional support and devotion a project of this magnitude 
would not have been possible.
The term “computer art” is rarely used in today’s cultural discourse. 
To use the term is to impart a sense of nostalgia, to reminisce about 
a bygone era of pioneers and antiquated machines. For most, the 
term appears thoroughly unsuited if applied to contemporary forms 
of art. Art employing the latest digital technologies no longer relies 
on stand-alone computers, but is embedded in multiple devices, 
interacting globally with mobile and Web-based technologies. 
For this generation of art students, computer art is thoroughly 
passé, more a curious preform to the dynamic world of digital art. 
Students are seldom interested in the computer as a singular type 
of technology—a medium defined by a physical machine—but are 
absorbed in digital modalities across diverse social and geographical 
spaces.
Young contemporary artists who employ digital technologies 
in their practice rarely make reference to computers. For example, 
Wade Guyton, an abstractionist who uses Microsoft Word and 
inkjet printers, does not call himself a computer artist. Moreover, 
New York Times  critics, who admire his work, are little concerned 
about his extensive use of computers in the art-making process.1 
This is a marked contrast from three decades ago when artists who 
utilized computers were labeled by critics—often pejoratively—as 
computer artists. For the present generation of artists, the computer, 
or more appropriately, the laptop, is one in an array of integrated, 
portable digital technologies that link their social and working 
life. With tablets and cell phones surpassing personal computers in 
Internet usage, and as slim digital devices resemble nothing like the Introduction
Unorthodox
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 2
room-sized mainframes and bulky desktop computers of previous 
decades, it now appears that the computer artist is finally extinct.
However, computer art is not yet that historical artifact, a fossil 
from which a new species of technologies can be said to have 
evolved. The term “computer art” can still be found in academia. 
The occasional conference, university graduate program, or 
college course still carries the term “computer art,” which means 
some educators have resisted current trends of replacing it with 
the up-to-date descriptors, such as “digital art” or “media art.”2 
The Computer Arts Society, formed in 1968 in the UK, remains 
steadfast, believing that the term has a historical significance that 
others designations lack. There remain defenders of the term too. 
Dominic McIver Lopes, one of those rare aestheticians who still 
employ the term, favors its use and asks audiences to “set aside 
the negative associations that cling to the name,” those common 
misgivings that he says propel us toward preferring the term 
“digital art.”3 On the whole, however, “digital art” has become the 
term of choice, both in the art world and the academy. As influential 
theorist and curator Peter Weibel recently wrote, computer art is 
now “finally implemented as ‘digital art.’”4
While the term “computer art” appears redundant in the face of 
rapid technological change, there are other reasons for its absence 
from our current lexicon. The negative associations that “cling”—
to use Lopes’ description—to computer art give us some clue to 
the deeper undercurrent of misgiving. As Douglas Kahn, a leading 
theorist of early digital music, rightly points out, when we speak 
of early computer art, it is often branded as “bad art.”5 For many 
artists of the period, the term both embodies a sense of rejection 
and reveals the essential contradiction in the art form itself. Pairing 
the noun “computer” with “art” has in effect built a label with an 
unending fission, a precarious reaction from joining two seemingly 
incompatible and oppositional worlds. This discomfort concerning 
the incongruous combination has in fact permeated all writing on 
the subject. For many of its detractors, computer art was simply 
a contradiction in terms; for even its most ardent exponents, the 
classifier was simply insufficient to describe the immense diversities 
within digital practice. In fact, ever since the birth of this neologism 
in 1963, to the decline of its use in the early 1990s, the oxymoronic 
overtones of the term “computer art” have troubled all who have 
used it. The term, unlike those within the narratives of modern art 
INTRODUCTION 3
that were coined by a disparaging critic and later accepted by the 
art establishment (“Impressionist” and “Cubist” come to mind), 
has remained problematized and contested throughout its entire 
history.
In many ways, computer art has become synonymous with 
negative criticism itself. Yet the nature of computer art’s criticism is 
complex and multileveled, often reflecting modes of traditional art 
criticism and at the same time being entirely divorced from it. Like its 
history, the criticism of computer art is unorthodox. For example, no 
single computer artwork has sustained public controversy, the engine 
that frequently drives criticism. There is no scandalous artwork like 
Édouard Manet’s Le déjeuner sur l’herbe  (1862–3), a painting that 
raised the ire of the French Academy and insulted public sensibilities, 
in the computer art movement. Likewise, no computer artwork has 
ever evoked the same sense of radical dislocation or bewilderment 
that met Pablo Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon  (1907). Yet, if 
we collect all the denigrating judgments of computer art, we find 
that they rival those of, if not exceed, all previous art movements. If 
we examine responses to computer art by professional critics, rarely 
do they represent judicial appraisals, that detached and objective 
perspective we believe formal criticism requires. Many critics were 
simply uninformed, as will be revealed, which was particularly 
troubling since a knowledgeable position was valued above all else. 
Being conversant with the subject was crucial in placing the critic’s 
words above mere opinion.
However, the first writers on computer art were not established 
art critics. They were practitioners of computing—most commonly 
scientists, technologists, and engineers who understood the 
complexities of this new technology. In addition, many of those 
who wrote on computer art were performing multiple functions: 
the art historian who organized historical facts and brought clarity 
to context, the critic who examined the value of the work, and the 
advocate who generated popular excitement. Not to say that these 
elements were in equal proportion: out of the three, judgment of 
aesthetic value remained the scarcest. There was no independent, 
disinterested perspective that we associate with art criticism. 
The first writers on computer art were deeply fascinated by the 
computer, becoming, as their writings show, emotionally invested. 
These disciplinary outsiders had the necessary technical expertise, 
yet lacked a deep understanding of art and modalities. In time, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 4
however, computer art would gain the attention of the mainstream 
critics. Art historians and art critics entered the fray, with some 
critics having notable reputations, such as John Canaday, Stuart 
Preston, Robert E. Mueller, and James Elkins. While these figures 
were widely known in the mainstream art world, there were other 
influential critics, including Jack Burnham, Jonathan Benthall, Gene 
Youngblood, Herbert W. Franke, and Jasia Reichardt, who would 
make their name in that difficult intersecting zone between art, 
science, and technology.
Computer art criticism was not limited to known and newly 
known writers either; its discursive space was much wider. 
The criticism of minimalist and conceptual art, which was 
contemporaneous with computer art, revolved around a small, 
some say elite, avant-garde cluster of celebrated critics who 
often employed esoteric language to describe the aesthetic or 
intellectual value of artwork. Conversely, computer art, with its 
interdisciplinary nature, had an even wider audience beyond that of 
science and technology. Computer art was part of the greater social 
sphere, driven in large part by the general public’s interest in the 
future of this emergent technology. Computer art has never been 
deprived of an audience. As much cultural as technological, the 
computer was a unique historical artifact. While it was one of the 
most tangible symbols of the late twentieth century, the computer 
remained allusive and mysterious. The computer garnered wide 
public interest, and because of its perceived impact on the world, 
the reaction to it was often immediate and impassioned. Indeed, 
where computer art lacked consideration from the mainstream 
art world, it certainly made up for it with keen public interest. 
Consequently, if we stratify computer art’s discursive space, we 
find that its reception and criticism is multi layered, with responses 
and reactions emanating from the mainstream art world; the fields 
of science and technology; the new creative space that emerged 
between art, science, and technology; and the larger public realm.
It is little wonder computer art’s critical response was so diverse; it 
reflected the wide-ranging artistic and scientific disciplines in which 
computer art first gained attention. While responses to computer 
art can often be described as excitable, a celebratory and superficial 
reaction to the newness and promise of an emerging art form, the 
majority were negative. Almost any artistic endeavor associated with 
early computing elicited a negative, fearful, or indifferent response. 
INTRODUCTION 5
As early as 1956, musicians and poets exploring the vistas of a new 
technology were ambivalent: thrilled at forging new artistic paths 
and yet subdued by an undercurrent of misgiving from their cultural 
peers. While computer music was often greeted with interest as the 
latest novelty, the early computer experimentalist Lejaren Hiller felt 
that emerging from “many quarters” was a deepening “incredulity 
and indignation.”6 Joel Chadabe, another pioneering computer 
composer, felt that the critics and the traditional musicians “feared” 
the machine and its potentially harmful influence on the entire 
field.7 In the early 1970s, Elliot Schwartz, in his listening guide 
to electronic music, best summed up the general reaction: “The 
notion of music ‘created’ by a computer always seems to arouse a 
surprising degree of hostility, usually on the part of people who find 
20th century art increasingly ‘dehumanized’ and ‘mechanical.’”8
Computer poetry fared little better. As Christopher Funkhouser 
has written, the literary world was underwhelmed by computer 
poetry.9 Mirroring the critical responses of mainstream music, 
literary critics focused on the dehumanizing tendencies of the 
computer and the perceived ontological break between author and 
reader.10 John Morris, writing in the Michigan Quarterly Review  in 
1967, praised the importance of the written poem as an essential 
“communication from a particular human being,” and noted that 
if the difficulty of working with the computer discouraged those 
currently interested, then poems would happily remain “one last 
refuge for human beings.”11
In the world of dance, also, the computer received what Jeanne 
Beaman described as a “curious but cool response.”12 Beaman, who 
in the early 1960s pioneered computer dance and choreography, 
explained in her introductory presentation to computer dance:
Most of us do not even want a machine of any kind to succeed 
in conceiving any art form at all. The arts are usually presented 
as our last refuge from the onslaughts of our whole machine 
civilization with its attendant pressures towards squeezing us 
into the straitjacket of the organized man.13
The most scathing attacks were saved for the visual arts. The most 
common critical position is one that merely dismisses computer art 
as inconsequential. Viewing computer art as tediously repetitious, 
the critics’ commentaries make clear their belief that it has no claims 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 6
to the status of art. Even when computer art gained fashionable 
notoriety, the critics, such as John Canaday from the New York 
Times , spurned computer art exhibitions as “popular sideshows.”14 
Computer art was another example of the vulgarization of science, 
where besotted artists, dallying with the latest scientific and 
technological media, produced what was tantamount to science as 
kitsch. Because it emerged from the abstract sciences, the computer 
art form was viewed by many as an anachronistic project—akin to 
the early modernist fascination with pure science. In general, artists 
from the mainstream held a common disdain for computer art 
shows, seeing them as “science fiction grotesqueries masquerading 
as art.”15
Beyond the ontological debate over computer art’s claim to be 
art, the other major response centered on the matter of aesthetics. 
The first critics described computer art as bleak and soulless and 
bemoaned the arrival of this strange and powerful machine in art. 
Robert E. Mueller wrote in Art in America  that the visual results 
from computers had been “exceedingly poor and uninspiring.”16 
According to Mueller, technologists lacked the necessary 
knowledge of art and its history, and their visual creations, which 
were mathematically inspired, bored the “sophisticated artistic 
mind to death.”17 While many galleries showed computer art, these 
exhibitions were often “condescendingly reviewed,” as though 
the medium was “without serious intent or noble aspiration.”18 
Nearly every computer artist tells a similar story, a tale in which 
their computer art is accepted on its merits, only to be rejected once 
the curators discovered it was generated on a computer. Computer 
artists were regularly rebuked and insulted by gallery directors. 
Such was the stigma attached to computers that artists, such as Paul 
Brown, have used the expression “kiss of death” to describe the act 
of using computers in art.19
Indifferent as many critics and curators were, there were some 
responses to computer art that were considerably more severe. In 
fact, computer art has aroused the kind of extreme resentment that 
characterized many of the idolatry controversies scattered through 
the history of art. Beyond the sabotaging of computers, physical 
attacks have been made on artists for their involvement with such 
devices, and the careers of art curators have been significantly 
damaged by their participation in computer art exhibitions. 
Though it is commonly accepted that computer art was unpopular 
INTRODUCTION 7
upon its arrival, many are unaware of the level of vitriol directed 
toward computer artists. In a case reaching the levels of harassment 
and personal attack, Grace Hertlein reported that she was called 
a “whore” and “traitor” by a fellow artist, who saw her choice of 
medium as morally questionable and as a complete rejection of 
authentic artistic traditions.20
While it did not encounter the extreme reactions that modern 
art received when it was first displayed (such as the American 
public’s xenophobic reaction to the Armory Show  of 1913 or the 
Nazi regimes’ racial slogans and mockery at the Degenerate Art  
exhibition of 1937), computer art’s negation was more enduring. 
The negative criticism lasted the entire duration of the movement, 
and computer art never found the widespread critical and cultural 
acceptance that modern art received. Computer art was different 
too in that it possessed an inordinate amount of self-deprecation, a 
kind of lack of confidence that meant exponents were unsure how 
to position the movement. Paradoxical as it sounds, supporters 
have been some of the strongest critics. In fact, a strange kind of 
defeatism or fatalism permeates much of the writing on computer 
art, producing a sense of the lost and forsakenness that affects the 
entire discourse.
Although exponents find the computer intriguing and significant, 
they often judge it a “disappointing instrument of representation.”21 
In the 1990s, commentators believed the computer art of the 1960s 
and 1970s deserved little attention. As Michael Rush rightly points 
out, the first large survey of the field, Frank Popper’s Art of the 
Electronic Age  (1993), gives scant attention to computer art before 
the 1980s. Similarly, Rush, in his later survey, wrote that it was 
only at the end of the 1990s that the “aesthetic bar” was raised 
sufficiently enough for computer art to warrant attention.22 More 
recently, scholars like Douglas Kahn assert that graphic arts in 
the first decade were less interesting—especially as it pertains to 
contemporary digital practice—than the work being completed in 
the fields of literature and music.23
In the last decade, however, the perception of early computer 
art has evolved. Writers no longer give a cursory treatment of the 
pioneering phase, but offer more detailed and nuanced accounts. 
Indeed, computer art, which was long considered “non-art” by 
traditionalists well into the 1990s, is now generally accepted as art. 
While traditional criteria for defining art have evolved, computer 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 8
art’s acceptance is largely due to the art-historical context recently 
provided by scholars. Interrelated with this new scholarship is a 
new audience who seeks to celebrate the history of digital media 
in the arts and honor those artists who were central in making it. 
In addition, aestheticians, with accumulative success, have built 
engaging theories of digital art that have assisted in deepening our 
understanding of digital practice. A small but committed market for 
digital art has also arisen, and collections, both private and public, 
have formed. The largest and most extensive collections are held at 
the V&A in London, the ZKM in Karlsruhe Germany, and the Anne 
and Michael Spalter Digital Art Collection in the United States. 
Offering much needed protection to these media-sensitive artworks, 
these collections have emerged as important research repositories, 
allowing future scholars access to rare digital artworks and their 
related documents.
Thanks to a decade of work by scholars and cultural critics, 
the summative accounts of the previous decades have given way 
to in-depth histories. Margit Rosen has described the rush of a 
new generation of scholars—Rosen being a prime example—who 
have “set out to find the protagonists and works of the pioneering 
era,” collecting and cataloging key documents as they went.24 
These new narratives, which benefit from extensive research and 
coherent critical paradigms, have particular national focus.25 While 
the historical vacuum is beginning to be filled, there still remains 
much research to be done, and, like all new research initiatives, 
questions have emerged. The difficulty of generating an appropriate 
methodology that encompasses the vastness and interdisciplinarity 
of digital arts also remains. Edward Shanken, a key art historian in 
the field, rightly points out that there is no clearly defined method for 
“analyzing the role of science and technology in the history of art.”26 
And Shanken believes that, without approaches that adequately 
make sense of the interconnectedness of the fields, digital art will 
remain misunderstood by traditionalists and marginalized from 
the larger narrative of art. Charlie Gere, a cultural historian and 
leading voice in the field, also believes that digital art and its history 
have been “disregarded” and “woefully neglected by contemporary 
art galleries and institutions.”27 Lamentably, nearly all surveys of 
art since the 1960s fail to mention computer art. For many, it is 
hard to reconcile the fact that the digital computer, perhaps the 
greatest and most impactful invention of the twentieth century 
INTRODUCTION 9
and a technology that fundamentally changed the economic and 
cultural fabric of the globe, is continually omitted from the history 
of art. Digital technologies, as Bruce Wands asserts, are so “firmly 
established” in “our daily lives” that their effect is profound at all 
levels of contemporary society.28 In a ubiquitous digital culture—
one with a severe knowledge gap—Gere advocates for a more 
forceful approach, believing that new research should elucidate, 
through argument, the cultural significance of computer-based arts. 
When the Machine Made Art  heeds that call.
While recent scholarship has begun to uncover the rich history 
of digital arts, it is yet to answer the fundamental question of 
computer art’s rejection. Why was computer art so heavily maligned? 
Every narrative mentions it, but none explores the reasons for it. 
Importantly, computer art’s repudiation has meant that all critical 
or historical endeavors have met with a similar fate: first posited 
as insignificant and then relegated to the margins of art discourse. 
I would argue that a close examination of computer art’s criticism 
reveals a multiplicity of prejudices, all of which have affected the 
field of digital art and added to the discontent and frustration that 
Shanken, Gere, and others have expressed. However, exploring 
the criticism of computer art is not a straightforward matter. For 
computer art’s somewhat turbulent history is, like its criticism, 
thoroughly unorthodox.
Computer art has a fragmented and often capricious history. 
Previous historical accounts of computer art possess idiomatic 
elements that separate it from traditional art history. They tend 
to be aggrandizing in nature, seeking to justify and promote 
computer art. Often simplistic, celebratory, and utopian, these 
accounts neglect the basic precepts of art history research, such as 
the artwork’s physical dimension and completion date. The scant 
archival material available is fragmented and often difficult to 
access, though recent research projects are remedying this. One of 
the main problems, however, is that narratives of computer art give 
priority to technical interests over historical context. Mirroring 
the influence of science and engineering journals, computer art 
discourse is filled with technical explanation. Consequently, 
computer art requires a specialized technical knowledge of its 
viewer. This is probably why the first histories of computer art 
focus on technological change as a narrative structure. In this 
deterministic model, the emergence of a new technology or 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 10
technique becomes a historical landmark. To use one often-
repeated example, the pioneering phases of the 1960s and 1970s, 
the commercial software of the 1980s, and the multimedia of the 
1990s become the usual configuration.
Herbert W. Franke, a key figure in computer art discourse and the 
first to write a historical account of computer art, believed that such 
a history was “dependent on the computers,” and that nothing could 
be achieved beyond the state of progress within computer science 
itself.29 While computer art was inextricably linked to the evolution 
of computer technology, the technical model of explanation is only 
one dimension in a possible spectrum of historical understandings. 
By using technology as the underlying logic, these histories fail to 
acknowledge the importance of cultural and ideological contexts in 
the emergence of computer art. Like technological determinism, this 
process removed the computer from its social and political reality 
and treated it as a self-forming technology in isolation.
As many interested art historians will admit, digital arts have 
remained difficult to assimilate into traditional art historiography. 
More so than others, computer art resists the linearity of art history. 
To research computer art is to probe several disciplines and their 
histories at once: the history of the computer as a visual medium, the 
history of computer graphics and its emergence as a global industry, 
and the history of computers in the creative and fine arts. This 
shared historical continuum is often convoluted and intertwined, 
making research difficult. For instance, the history of computer art 
and the history of graphics are indiscernible, especially in the first 
decade, as illustrated in Franke’s dual-titled Computer Graphics—
Computer Art  (1971), which represents the first comprehensive 
account of computer art. The boundaries between the two, as we 
shall see, remained permeable and indistinct.
The expanding nature and convergence of digital technology 
have meant that computer art is essentially a diffuse practice. Hence, 
a plurality of theories emerged around computer art, resulting in a 
continual need to define the “computer.” Defining its nature, crucial 
properties, and necessary conditions remained a central aspect of 
computer art discourse. Because the computer was a variegated 
technology, any concept associated with its explication had 
difficulty sustaining competing articulations. As such, computer art 
remained an elusive concept that frustrated and defied the powers 
of definition.
INTRODUCTION 11
Another problem confronting researchers of computer art is 
initially defining which computer art form is under consideration. 
Since its inception, the term has been employed in a variety of 
contexts. As the computer became the new experimental medium, 
it was employed within a constellation of practices, including visual 
arts, film, choreography, literature, and music. The term “computer 
art” has over time denoted different artistic practices. In addition, 
the issue of definition was complicated by the fact that exponents 
of computer art included artists, scientists, engineers, technologists, 
and mathematicians. This has led commentators with vastly 
different perspectives to define computer art’s essential character in 
relation to their artistic goals and disciplinary norms.
Similarly, the proliferating nature of digital technology meant 
new forms were perpetually surfacing and rapidly diversifying. 
As Dieter Daniels wrote regarding the growing complexity and 
intricacies of current digital media, it is “impossible to take in the 
whole picture.”30 No technology has ever unfurled its potential as 
swiftly as computers. In contrast to traditional tools, which retained 
their form and function for hundreds of years, the computer 
has changed dramatically in a short space of time. There was, as 
pioneering artist Mark Wilson suggests, a “bewildering variety of 
computational techniques” available to the artist.31 Throughout the 
history of computer art, it seems that artists have often struggled 
with the morphology and tempo of digitalization. For the theorist 
and artist, it was difficult to follow the rapidly evolving nature of 
the technology and the sudden succession and redundancy of forms. 
Equally, the historian was faced with the difficulty of mapping 
these rapidly transforming and ever-expanding digital forms. This 
is perhaps why art historians have traditionally preferred subjects 
that evolved at a manageable pace.
Also, because computer art was an international phenomenon—
best described as globally dispersed in advanced countries—it did 
not derive any cultural legitimacy from a nationalist art history, 
although some recent publications have focused on national 
developments.32 Apart from having no national heritage, there 
was no centralized location or organizing body that could devise 
a coherent corpus of belief, in contrast to the myriad of other 
twentieth-century art movements that achieved this through a 
type of geographically linked metropolianism. With the exception 
of the Computer Art Society in London, there was no attempt by 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 12
computer art practitioners to formally organize themselves socially 
and politically around a central idea.
But it is within this unconventional history that the key to computer 
art’s alienation is found. An examination of its history shows a 
dizzying array of ideologies impacting and informing computer art. 
Within this discursive terrain, competing dogma between art and 
science shape and construct its reception and criticism. Born into a 
culture war, computer art becomes a site of contestation, a kind of 
pawn in a battle for cultural supremacy. Subsequently, to understand 
the criticism of computer art, we are required to illuminate those 
emerging theories, methods, and themes that provide the life force of 
computer art. These include cybernetics, information theory, artificial 
intelligence, artificial life, and the science of complexity, among 
others. As will be shown in later chapters, the interaction of these 
discourses within the fields of science and art causes contradiction 
and instability within the computer art movement. Yet, it is these 
theories, poorly understood by mainstream art critics, which provide 
theoretical depth to computer art. Through a deep examination 
of key computer-generated artworks, this book provides a model 
for interpretation in which an informed position, rather than an 
uninformed dogmatic approach, is able to lay bare the inherent value 
and theoretical implications of early digital art.
Beyond situating a set of visual practices within an art historical 
context, this book also exposes the wider debates surrounding 
computer art. Because the computer has its own cultural dynamics, 
quite beyond its rapid technological growth, it is necessary to 
consider computer art as part of the social history of computers. 
Nevertheless, it is important to never lose sight of the relationship 
of computer art to the art movements with which it shares a specific 
historical epoch, such as the Art and Technology movement, video 
art, conceptual art, geometric abstraction, and others. When cast 
into relief against those other movements, computer art’s unique 
theoretical and cultural position becomes apparent.
My narrative begins in 1963, when the relatively cogent idea of 
computer art moves into the cultural domain and receives its first 
critical appraisal. The crisis of 1989 provides a point of departure, 
when the computer art project is engulfed in heated argument and 
the term “computer art” begins to, as Richard Wright observed that 
year, “drop out of usage.”33 Because the pictorial, static form of 
computer art received the most intense criticism and possessed the 
INTRODUCTION 13
most turbulent and contested history, it remains the focus of this 
study. Written material on computer art has generally concentrated 
on the three major areas of production: computer-generated visual 
art, computer-generated music, and computer-generated animation. 
The dominant form—the one that was produced by the highest 
number of artists—remained computer-generated visual art. Other 
forms of computer art, such as animation and electronic music, did 
receive similar negative responses, but also found a modicum of 
commercial and institutional success.34
Ironically, the static works of computer art—the art form that 
received the most vociferous criticism—is the art form now most 
easily exhibited. For curators, presenting dynamic, time-based, or 
interactive computer art remains challenging, especially with older 
artworks that require obsolete technology. Computer art was both 
traditional, using the frame and established inks and grounds, and, 
by means of digital generation, new. If experimental new media 
art remains somewhat marginalized today, even if begrudgingly 
accepted in some major museums, static works are most familiar 
and assimilated into collections.
The structure of this book is chronological, showing the historical, 
rhetorical, and theoretical shifts in computer art discourse. The key 
objective of Chapter 1, “Future Crashes,” is to map the discursive 
environment in which computer art first emerged. Beyond 
chronicling the notoriety and controversy of the first computer 
art exhibitions (held in the advanced industrialized nations of the 
United States, West Germany, and Japan), the chapter examines 
the rapid crystallization of computer art in military and corporate 
research laboratories, which form the first crucible of the art form. 
As Gustav Metzger stated in his reflection on the birth of computer 
art, the “true avant-garde” was the military.35 I argue that computer 
art encapsulates much of the technocratic vision and the scientific 
pragmatism of the post-war period. Computer art, governed by 
technical utility and conceived through the logical philosophies of 
Western science and technology, is found to be largely underpinned 
by what many perceived as the rising cult of science. Computer art’s 
relationship to science and its ideologies would remain close and 
enduring. However, this relationship precluded computer art from 
finding legitimacy in the art world. Shaped by military prerogatives 
and scientific ideals, computer art grew against the grain of fine art 
practices and its established traditions.
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 14
To illustrate how atypical and incongruent computer art was 
to mainstream visual art, one needs to examine those nascent art 
movements that share the same cultural field. Apart from being 
produced in research laboratories, many of which were military, 
computer art was disseminated by specialized computer science 
journals. Its self-sufficiency in the scientific realm differs from 
those art movements that closely resemble computer art, including 
the avant-garde Art and Technology movement and conceptual 
art movement. Although they share many characteristics, both 
theoretically and aesthetically, these art forms are able to situate 
themselves more comfortably within the fine art tradition. 
Moreover, computer art’s idiosyncratic traits, such as its devotion 
to mathematics and its adoration of the machine, meant it 
was orientated more toward the unfamiliar philosophies of 
technoscience.
When computer art arrived on the fine art stage in 1965, the 
computer was already a compelling symbol, an artifact that had 
accumulated complex cultural meanings. The first exhibitions 
received an immediate and mostly negative response. The dominant 
humanist tradition within the art world contributed significantly 
to this anti-computer reaction. Many found the appearance of the 
computer in the sanctified realm of fine art as another unwelcome 
incursion by modern science. Following the mechanized atrocities of 
the two world wars, there was widespread disenchantment with the 
increasing rationalization of the post-industrial world. Combining 
the strong anthropomorphic ideals of Renaissance humanism 
with the eighteenth-century traditions of romantic protestation against 
the machine, this humanist reaction sought to admonish computer 
art for its dehumanizing and hyper-rationalizing tendencies. In 
addition to dismissing computer art as aesthetically inconsequential, 
the critics attacked computer art on an ethical level, branding the 
abstract compositions as cold and clinical. This was more a reflection 
on the medium than on the art. Computer art had extensive aesthetic 
similarities to the abstract work of the period, including conceptual 
avant-garde art and modernist hard-edged abstraction. Such a 
comparison helps to demonstrate that the reception, a type of anti-
computer dogmatism, was more emotive than critical.
For the humanist, the artificial methodologies of computer-
generated art alienated the human from the art experience. Computer 
art seemed a deliberate denial of human feelings of wonder and 
INTRODUCTION 15
mystery through the cold calculation of instrumental rationality. 
For critics, it was concurrent with the rationalization of the world, 
a process by which all human activities are progressively exposed 
to increasing calculation and control by impersonal technological 
forces. Although this liberal sentiment would continue to haunt 
the reception of computer art, the most compelling criticism 
came from other quarters. In 1964, the same year that computer 
art first entered the cultural sphere, influential cultural theorists 
Jacques Ellul, Herbert Marcuse, and Marshall McLuhan produced 
publications that in different ways were critical of technology. The 
Cold War period saw the popularization of dystopian theories that 
posited technology as inherently predisposed toward domination. 
And computers were a central part of what the technocratic and 
scientific regimes used in prosecuting the Cold War.
Two significant ideological forces that mediate the anti-computer 
sentiment within the fine arts can be identified. The first is the 
humanist position that carries a heavy anthropocentric bias and 
has a general resistance to advanced technology. In many ways, the 
humanist of the 1960s can be said to have subscribed to the tenets of 
twentieth-century modernism, including the ideologies of progress, 
rationality, and teleology. All were products of Enlightenment 
thought. The second is an anti-humanist stance that emerged in 
the 1960s and promoted a measured skepticism toward technology 
and its perceived modes of control. Whereas humanism in the fine 
arts tradition was both liberal and conservative, attacking certain 
technologies for their dehumanizing dimension, the popular anti-
humanist critique of technology attacked the rising technocracy 
rather than the technology itself. This 1960s anti-humanist response 
was a precursor of the postmodern critical position taken by many 
art critics in the 1970s and 1980s. The multiple strains of humanism 
and their oppositional attitude toward computer technology have 
had a negative impact upon the reception and criticism of computer 
art. Nonetheless, as explored in Chapter 3, there were humanist 
strains that provided a positive part of the growing mythology 
surrounding computer art.
This emotive response to computers was not just a knee-jerk 
reaction by angst-ridden humanists. The zealous technologists 
did little to allay fears that the machine would render the artist 
redundant. Following the 1950s discourse on artificial intelligence, 
many technologists explicitly promoted computer art within the 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 16
“man versus machine” paradigm, which effectively positioned 
the computer as an oppositional force. Beyond touting the first 
renowned computer art piece as successful simulacra of a modern 
master, the rhetoric emerging from the technologists tended toward 
the final demystifying of art. For the technologist, mechanized 
creativity was simply a natural progression in the computer’s bid 
to automate all human functions. On a more fundamental level, 
the scientists envisaged a machine to wipe away what they saw as 
the fallacious mysteries of art. In contrast, most art critics felt that 
art made by an autonomous machine undermined the integrity, 
function, and meaning of art and its history. The computer 
threatened to invade the territories of art. Like Charles Baudelaire 
in his reaction to photography, critics and artists were fearful that 
this could ultimately usurp and corrupt human creativity. Fearing 
the computer, mainstream artists felt that they were surrendering 
the privilege of creating art to a mere automaton.
The widely held view that the computer was encroaching on 
the sacred ground of human artistry was not the only problem 
facing computer art. The anti-computer sentiment was part of a 
larger controversy permeating cultural discourse, especially in the 
West. Late in the 1950s, C. P. Snow brought the perceived polarity 
of science and the humanities into sharp public focus with his 
notorious Two Cultures  lecture. Because computer art was an 
amalgamation of art and science paradigms, it appeared to embody 
this cultural tension. The Two Cultures  debate framed much of the 
early criticism and reception of computer art. Computer art writing 
is filled with rhetoric concerning the antagonism between art and 
science. Mostly, the technologists stared across the cultural divide 
to lambast the artist for being sluggish in taking up the newest 
technology, while the artists countered with claims that the scientist 
was a naïve and unwanted trespasser.
The competing ideologies of art and science would endure as 
a polarizing force in computer art. Because computer art was an 
unfamiliar and foreign phenomenon, emerging from a technocratic 
and militaristic world, the art establishment found it to be 
disconcerting. Equally, however, for the science sphere, computer 
art was a logical, yet trivial and aberrant offshoot of the fruitful 
symbiosis of science and technology. Subsequently, the computer 
art project rested precariously between the two major cultural 
discourses. While in many ways computer art was an attempt to 
INTRODUCTION 17
bridge two divergent and opposing worlds, it was destined, through 
its scientific and technocratic heritage, to remain marginalized 
from the mainstream art world. Likewise, the scientific community 
would malign computer art because its artistic intentions were 
inconsequential and insignificant to the key project of science.
A child born to loveless parents, computer art nevertheless 
benefited from the new artists who came into the field in the 1970s 
and positioned computer art as a site of cultural conciliation. As 
happened with the Art and Technology movement in the United 
States, the polarities of the cultural field were to be united by the 
synthesis of knowledge and collaborative effort. Chapter 2, “Coded 
Aesthetics,” continues the focus on the 1960s; however, the chapter 
also examines how early computer art was predominantly shaped 
by trends in post-industrial science and technology. Computer art 
shared primarily the assumptions, terminology, insights, concepts, 
and methods from a variety of technoscience paradigms. For 
instance, rather than having recourse to conventional aesthetic 
criteria, computer art found its first aesthetic tradition in the 
changing visuality of science. Especially in the first decade, the 
symbolic narratives of science and mathematics were far more 
influential than modernist paradigms. New electronic visual devices 
fostered growing interest in picturing the visible and invisible forces 
of nature. Scientists, with likeminded artists, became fascinated 
with the visual byproducts of scientific research. This caused a 
shift in which the bewitching patterns of nature—visualized by 
mechanical drawing instruments and other electronic technology—
became a significant source of artistic creativity. This mixture of 
mathematical–mechanical patterning provided the first aesthetic 
foundation for computer art, along with its first mythology. Like 
computer art, the servo-mechanical drawing instruments from 
the natural and abstract sciences appeared to connect to the 
mysterious forces of nature. With the mathematical patterns of 
nature abstracted into computational form, computers appeared to 
generate strange geometric forms from some mysterious Platonic 
space. The technologists and scientists relished the mathematical 
grandeur of harmony, order, and symmetry—those elements that 
find continuity with ancient Pythagorean, Platonic, and Byzantine 
traditions. The mystic space of mathematics and the desire to 
discover the unseen realm of abstraction emerged as a key mythology 
in computer art.
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 18
The other factor that illustrates the trend toward the abstract 
sciences and that made computer art diverge considerably from 
the traditions of fine art is the desire for the mathematization 
of art. This quest puts computer art at odds with the sacrosanct 
assumptions of traditional fine art. Because the computational 
experience is predominantly an abstract one, the discourse of 
computer art is part of the primal dream of mathematics. Influenced 
by mathematical–logical formalism and the empiricist epistemology 
of natural sciences, the technologists and mathematicians envisaged 
the power of the computer as an experimental tool—an instrument 
to transform complex mathematical information into visual 
phenomena. Beyond making the abstract visible, there is a prolonged 
attempt to submit art to the powers of mathematics—to, in effect, 
demystify art. For many exponents of computer art, mathematical 
formalization could purge art of the taint of rhetoric and mystery. 
The Kantian doctrine of artistic creativity, which is the cornerstone 
of Romanticism, would come under relentless attack. Fine art was 
no longer the domain of the “artistic genius,” those with “a talent 
for producing that for which no definite rule can be given,” as 
Kant suggested.36 Instead, scientists, armed with the ultra-reductive 
machine, attempted to debunk the notion of the genius—effectively 
claiming that talent is not innate, but could be programmed into a 
computer. The scientists and technologists found in the computer 
the possibility of a fully mechanized art, or, as Franke put it, the 
final “delegation of the aesthetic-creative processes to machines.”37
The mathematicians and technologists put their faith in the 
emerging technoscience system-based paradigms of the day. 
Combining information theory and cybernetics with structural 
linguistics and behavioral psychology, technologists and 
mathematicians closely observed the production and reception of 
art. Beyond deciphering the mysteries of art, the technologists and 
mathematicians believed it was possible, through programmed 
aesthetic and stylistic rules, to automate aesthetic production and 
“program the beautiful,” as Max Bense famously phrased it.38
“Virtual Renaissance,” Chapter 3, covers the 1970s and traces 
the significant shifts that take place in the computer art movement 
during this decade. The most important occurs in praxis. Artists, 
once adverse to computers, began enthusiastically exploring the 
computer as an art-making device. Over time, artists filled the 
space originally taken by scientists and technologists, developing 
INTRODUCTION 19
the esprit de corps  of a relatively coherent group. In trying to 
avoid antagonistic collaborations, a central factor leading to the 
disintegration of the Art and Technology movement, a number 
of artists learned the intricacies of computing. In the shadow of 
Art and Technology’s decline, a new breed of computer artist 
emerged—the artist-programmer. With the influx of trained artists, 
new mythologies and narratives emerged that brought new-found 
optimism and reassurance. One of the key icons to emerge from this 
period, which provided a recurring theme, was the Renaissance figure 
of Leonardo da Vinci. The Renaissance master encapsulated the 
new artist-programmer paradigm and the dream of unified learning 
that was such a powerful desire within the 1960s Two Cultures  
debate. This new discourse sustained computer art during a period 
when other technological art forms fell from favor. An emerging 
mythology was not, however, the only cause of computer art’s 
relative success through the 1970s. Apart from the new publications 
and journals (of which Leonardo  was the focal) that emerged in the 
early 1970s, one of the key invigorating and sustaining features was 
the growing number of women in the field of computer art. Having 
to overcome the masculine world of computing, women emerged 
as authorities in both criticism and practice. In addition, the global 
increase in computer literacy and the ever-expanding computer 
industry facilitated the influx of artists to the field. After a period 
of mistrust concerning computers, artists began feeling a new sense 
of ease around the computer, which, through its ubiquitousness and 
expanding role, would clearly play a significant part in modern life, 
and thus in art.
The appearance of the artist brought new humanistic tendencies 
to the once impenetrably cool and utilitarian computer art form. 
The nascent artist-programmer paradigm shifts the emphasis 
away from mathematically inspired abstraction toward such 
traditional fine art genres as landscape and self-portraiture. There 
was a direct attempt to humanize the machine. Moreover, the 
new understandings of programming, which revolved around 
intuition and heuristics, allowed the artist freedom to interact with 
the computer in an open-ended and responsive manner, which 
contrasts to the self-generating nature of previous work. Using 
the computer as a mechanical generator of vast amounts of visual 
form, the artist explored the diverse potential within a computer art 
system. However, while there was an emergent subjectivity in 1970s 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 20
computer art, the quest to make “deep inroads” into the mysteries 
of art, as Jack Burnham wrote, remained a defining characteristic.39
Despite their impact upon the field and the diversity of technique 
emerging from their influence, artists became highly critical of 
computer art, as did commentators and critics. Computer art’s 
renaissance is perhaps more virtual than real. Chapter 3 concludes 
by exploring how, and on what grounds, representatives from 
science and art attacked computer art. Both critics and exponents 
made scathing assessments of computer art during the 1970s. 
For them, the abstract and natural sciences could not provide an 
adequate aesthetic foundation. Artists were quick to lay blame 
at the feet of the scientists and technologists who, without real 
claim, arrogantly called themselves artists. As the criticism of 
computer art was predominantly formed from the dissent between 
the cultural fields and their competing agendas, the first stage of 
computer art was dismissed as unimpressive and inconsequential. 
To measure computer art’s qualified failure, the chapter concludes 
with an examination of the relative success of video art. While 
they both emerged in a similar techno cultural environment, video 
art was legitimized almost immediately through a combination of 
critical, institutional, and counter-cultural support. Crowned the 
new “avant-garde” with festivals and retrospectives, video rapidly 
became an art “genre,” while computer art remained marginalized, 
languishing in a state of malcontent.
Chapter 4, entitled “Frontier Exploration,” explores the first half 
of the 1980s when computer art again attracted new interest and 
popularity. Computer art and its discourse underwent significant 
change through the expanding nature of digital technology and the 
cultural popularity of emerging technoscience paradigms. One of the 
most notable changes in computer art discourse was the re-emphasis 
on Neo-Platonism and mathematical mysticism. Computer artists 
became the “pioneers” of a new digital world. Beginning with the 
computer artists of the 1970s and materializing in its strongest 
form in the early 1980s, the computer was increasingly imagined as 
a mythic space, an abstract frontier for artists to endlessly explore. 
This growing metaphysical overtone was the result of a number 
of factors. One was the impact of, and cultural interest in, the 
science of complexity. Chaos theory and fractal geometry became 
popular metaphors for a raft of social phenomena. These theories 
had a direct impact on the consciousness of the computer artists, 
INTRODUCTION 21
who imagined themselves as discoverers exploring the mysterious 
territories between order and chaos.
Technoscience themes continued to shape, sustain, and develop 
computer art. However, the ever-evolving nature of computer 
technology defied any singular conceptualization. With first the 
development and then the refinement of the graphics interface, 
the computer invited a whole new kind of practice. The personal 
computer, with its new user-friendly interface of windows, 
icons, and later the mouse and pointer systems, revolutionized 
computing and brought a raft of potential applications to visually 
orientated fields, such as desktop publishing, industrial design, 
and entertainment. This precipitated a shift away from the 
province of the specialist—the orthodox artist-programmer—
toward the uninitiated practitioner or user. Commercial software 
development resulted in a number of art and design applications. 
These applications embedded the traditional art-making metaphors 
and processes of drawing and painting into a real-time interactive 
interface. Thus, the new breed of computer artist was not required 
to learn programming or understand the complexities of the 
machine. With the refinement and commercialization of special 
input devices, such as the joystick, stylus, and light pen, artists 
began to work directly upon screen-based imagery. Beyond the 
computer interface, there was a new convergence of electronic and 
digital media. Multimedia allowed artists to incorporate a number 
of sensory modes into interactive and performative events. These 
technological developments resulted in two significant outcomes 
for computer art. First, static imagery appeared outdated in the 
face of new dynamic and interactive digital techniques. Second, 
the off-the-shelf commercial software packages effectively divided 
the existing computer art project into two camps. The first of 
these, the purists, who represented the artist-programmers, saw 
themselves as working with the essential algorithmic nature of the 
medium. The second group, the commercial software users, treated 
the computer as a mere tool—a means to an artistic end. So began 
the rhetorical debate that centered on the mind/body dualism in 
which one group privileged the analytical and cerebral while the 
other valued traditional artistic standards such as intuition, craft, 
and manual dexterity. As the decade proceeded, the gulf between the 
two groups widened, resulting in a raft of criticism concerning the 
project of computer art. “Computer art” as a term became a site of 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 22
contestation between rival groups as they attempted to assign and 
control its meaning. Apart from analyzing the general ambivalence 
surrounding computer art, the chapter concludes by demonstrating 
the increasing de-rationalization of the computer art object and the 
move away from the idealization of mathematics as the normative 
aesthetic and theoretical paradigm.
Chapter 5, entitled “Critical Impact,” explores the mounting 
crisis and widespread discontent that developed at the close of 
the 1980s. This resulted in the fragmentation of computer art into 
vastly contrasting conceptualizations in 1989. Key to this division 
was a series of journal articles written in 1989 that recorded the 
changing discursive space and resulting schism. More significantly, 
these articles provided the first instances of critical discourse in the 
realm of computer art. Richard Lucas’ Delphi Study , conducted 
in 1986, which systematically gauges the thinking of theorists 
and practitioners at the time, confirmed a distinctive shift toward 
contemporary art and its dominant critical discourse. Those 
computer artists who used the computer as a tool began theorizing 
digital technology through postmodern critical modes. Following 
trends in art critical discourse in the early 1980s, they significantly 
reoriented computer art discourse toward the social-critical. For 
the first time, the thinking of Walter Benjamin, Michel Foucault, 
Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, Jean Baudrillard, and Jean-
François Lyotard were discussed in relation to computer art. The 
intention of the new postmodern computer art commentators was 
to fill the critical and theoretical void that had plagued computer 
art since its inception. They saw the lack of criticality as the most 
pressing problem of computer art. The first objective of this new 
critical stance was the negation of the term “computer art” and the 
need to identify, and if necessary recast, the history of computer 
art. For the postmodernists, the important aspect of the computer 
was that it disrupted the agenda of modernism. So, in a complete 
turnaround from previous criticism by both humanists and anti-
humanists, the computer was increasingly perceived as a technology 
of rupture rather than an embodiment of the Enlightenment vision.
Postmodernists tended to align computer technology with the 
history of photographic technology. Viewed through the new 
photographic digitalizing software, computer art became increasingly 
photogenic. Postmodernist critics also attacked the discourse 
of computer art for being apolitical and inherently conservative. 
INTRODUCTION 23
Programmers tended not to be driven by anti-authoritarian 
imperatives or any kind of political radicalism. They were far too 
devoted to the machine and its potential. While the postmodernists 
attempted to formulate a homogenous and unified critical position, 
computer art as a practice proved ideologically diverse. Whereas 
postmodernists devalued the mainstays of modernism—ideals of 
uniqueness, authorial genius, and formal purity—many computer 
artists advocated a return to modernist principles, in particular 
formalism. Many of the commentators reinforced the close 
allegiance computer art shared with the discourses of science and 
technology. They stressed the importance of existing scientific 
paradigms and methodologies. Computer art, on the whole, was 
incompatible with much of the postmodernist project because 
computer art originated from and was heavily invested in the 
modernist paradigm. I argue that critical postmodernism, or the 
model employed to theorize contemporary photography, is an ill-
fitting paradigm for the critique of computer art in the 1980s. There 
were inherent contradictions in employing the intellectual discourse 
of postmodernism in the critique of computer art. After all, an arc 
of twentieth-century continental theorists and philosophers who 
represented the critical foundation of the postmodern position were 
skeptical of the promise of science and technology.
While the application of postmodernism to computer art 
was modish in character, it did bring political consciousness 
and contextual understanding to computer art. The influence 
of postmodernism and critical theory, in general, provided a 
theoretical foundation for digital art and new media in the 1990s. 
Nevertheless, postmodernism certainly did not take over as the 
dominant paradigm from which computer art could be understood. 
The technoscience paradigm of artificial life that emerged with the 
synthesis between biology and information in the 1980s had an 
enduring impact on computer art. While the biological metaphor 
was implicit in the work of the 1970s, by the 1980s, with fractal and 
genetic algorithms, the metaphor became fully active. The biological 
metaphors of generativity and emergence became crucial to those 
art forms that emerged in the wake of computer art’s decline, such 
as “generative art” and “algorithmic art.” Similarly, facing the 
expanding digital art field, many computer artist-programmers 
rearticulated the essential aspects of the computer as central to the 
art’s meaning. Like the postmodernists, they also abandoned the 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 24
term “computer artists” for a myriad of other designations, such as 
“proceduralists,” “dataists,” and finally the “algorists.”
In the epilogue “Aftermath,” the fate of computer art in the 1990s 
is evaluated. From 1989 onward, the term became increasingly 
moribund as a lexicon of other more defining terms took its place. 
These include “algorithmic art,” “generative art,” “random art,” 
“software art,” “system art,” and many others. This concluding 
section demonstrates how the history of computer art—the so-
called pioneering phase—acts as a prehistory for the now dominant 
discourses of digital art. Also noted is the way the postmodern 
understanding of technology began to prevail within digital and 
new media discourse. By the 1990s—through the central idea of 
virtuality—immersion, cyberspace, interactivity, and telepresence 
began to take center stage. These discourses are found to be replete 
with theory from continental philosophy. However, computer art 
does not fade away under the domination of new media theory. 
Much of its philosophy, central tenets, and history are nonetheless 
embedded in other discourses. Beyond being crucial in the evolution 
of art toward new media, computer art, through its pioneering 
artists, laid the foundation for digital art culture. In addition, the 
early computer artists were the first to institute the innovative digital 
and media art programs that are so widespread today. Many of the 
pioneering artists, once courageous in their attempt to carve out 
an art practice with what was an exceedingly difficult technology, 
have built enduring careers. As digital technology has now become 
culturally integrated, the memories of chastisement and ridicule 
have begun to fade. A new focus, one deprived of old prejudices, 
has begun the process of revaluating these computer-generated 
artworks, finding them to be acutely important to the history of art.
In 1964, Toronto art critic Arnold Rockman joined with computer 
scientist Leslie Mezei to write the first recognizable piece of 
computer art criticism. Appearing in Canadian Art  and entitled “The 
Electronic Computer as an Artist,” this seminal article possessed all 
of the basic elements of art criticism: historical context, stylistic 
analysis, and, most importantly, evaluative judgment. Still, these 
elements were limited in scope. The article, which was largely an 
introduction for unfamiliar readers, outlined recent achievements 
and prognosticated the future of this promising technology in 
the arts. While the article was notable for its attempt at formal 
criticism, the authors’ tone was distinctive, for its tenor was one of 
admonishment.
As with all co-authored writing, it is difficult—if not impossible—
to entangle the prose, correctly identifying each author’s attitude. In 
this case, the authors were from two different disciplines, with one 
from the humanities and the other from the sciences. On a pragmatic 
level, the article required two sets of knowledge and expertise. 
Rockman would provide the art-history analysis and critic’s eye, 
and Mezei would supply the technical explanation and recent 
trends in computing. It remains entirely fitting that the first article 
on computer art required an interdisciplinary union, and this 
combined method would embody those tensions that would plague 
the movement. In their attempt to make sense of an emerging 
field, both artist and scientist were fully reliant on each other’s 
knowledge, thus recognizing the deficiencies and inherent duality of 
computer art. Yet whatever viewpoint each brought to the article, CHAPTER ONE
Future crashes
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 26
there was an agreement that visual artists were severely lacking, 
while the scientist, acting as a foil to the reticent artist, was the real 
avant-garde of computing.
Rockman and Mezei believed visual artists were blind to the 
power of the computer, believing the “lukewarm response” and lack 
of interest from painters and sculptors was perhaps “a result of 
ignorance.”1 Undeniably, visual artists were slow to recognize the 
computer’s potential. While many musicians and poets embraced the 
new technology as early as 1956, it would be a number of years later 
before technologists intentionally created visually aesthetic designs, 
and longer still before trained artists embraced digital computing. 
As Rockman and Mezei understood, the artist had no role in the 
development of the newest creative medium; rather, the scientist—
or more particularly the technologist—had become the vanguard 
of computer-generated imagery.2 The authors were not alone in 
identifying apathy, for other technologists felt somewhat perplexed 
by the reticence shown by the art community. Some even felt that 
artists lacked the necessary insight to appreciate the implications 
of the computer, and that they, the scientists and technologists, 
were the only ones capable of exploring the mesmerizing vistas 
unleashed by computer technology. Mezei and Rockman simply 
believed that artists regarded the “machine as their enemy.”3 Later, 
Jonathan Benthall, who trained as a social anthropologist, stated, 
using a more sexualized metaphor, that the computer had become 
for the artist a “creature of great sexual attractiveness whose actual 
anatomy remains elusive, frigid and unexplored.”4
Beyond the reference to the growing epistemological divide 
between art and science, what is left out of the article is perhaps most 
revealing. Two award-winning computer artworks, entitled Splatter 
Pattern  and Stain Glass Window  (each published a year before in 
the journal Computers and Automation ), were not attributed to an 
artist or a research laboratory, as all of the others featured in the 
article had been. Only months before, in May 1964, Mezei had 
given the first lecture on computer art at the fourth meeting of the 
Computing and Data Processing Society of Canada, which formed 
the basis for “Artistic Design by Computers,” an article printed 
in the 1964 August edition of Computers and Automation . In his 
timeline of recent events, he mentions Splatter Pattern  again, though 
not by name but by the process in which it was made.5 This image, 
which graced the front cover of Computers and Automation , was 
FUTURE  CRASHES 27
the first computer art to be judged as the best out of that year’s 
submissions. Interestingly, the U.S. Military was responsible for the 
computer program that generated the artwork.
A military laboratory producing the first recognized award-
winning piece of computer art in the United States is certainly 
unorthodox. In fact, there is no similar example in the history of art. 
The uncomfortable fact of computer art’s origins has prompted many 
commentators and proponents to situate the emergence of computer 
art a number of years after 1963, effectively bypassing its military 
beginnings. The reason why Rockman and Mezei failed to mention 
it may indicate a sensitivity that others in the arts acutely felt.
The trade journal Computers and Automation  (later to become 
Computers and People ) facilitated the birth of computer art through 
its “Computer Art Contest” of 1963. Submissions were invited for 
any artistic drawing or design made by a computer. That year, the 
first and second prizes went to the United States Army Ballistic 
Research Laboratories (BRL) in Aberdeen, Maryland, the same 
laboratory that had started the computer industry in the United 
States during World War II. The army-sponsored revolution in 
computing at BRL had produced the famous ENIAC, which was 
followed by the ORDVAC, EDVAC, and the BRLESC 1, which in 
1962–3 most likely had a role in producing the first examples of 
computer art. The prize-winning art piece Splatter Pattern , which 
was printed on an early printer called a “dataplotter,” was a design 
analogue of the radial and tangential distortions of a camera lens 
(Figure 1.1). In 1964, the same laboratory won first prize for an 
image produced from the plotted trajectories of a ricocheting 
projectile (Figure 1.2). However, as mathematical visualizations 
of natural phenomena, these authorless images were not produced 
for aesthetic reasons. As the captions accompanying the artwork 
communicate, the artworks were, as Rockman and Mezei rightly 
assert, “merely an aesthetic by-product” of utilitarian pursuits.6
Notwithstanding, the images—deemed “beautiful” by 
Computers and Automation ’s editor Edmund C. Berkeley—were 
published as “art.” Three years before, in 1960, William Fetter, 
a Boeing employee, had coined the term “computer graphics” to 
describe computer-generated imagery. Berkeley, through Computers 
and Automation , contributed to the general currency of the term 
“computer art” and, in consequence, propelled these new creations 
toward the discourse of art.
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 28
FIGURE 1.1  United States Army Ballistic Research Laboratories, Splatter 
Pattern , 1963. Computer-generated, graphed on an Electronic Associates, 
Inc. Dataplotter. From Computers and Automation (August 1963). Courtesy 
of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory.
While these images, automated and functional as they were, 
were not construed as objects in the tradition of Marcel Duchamp’s 
Readymades , neither were the technologists anti-art in the 
Duchampian sense. Rather, they perceived their machine-made 
product through the narrow lens of conventional pattern-making 
and novel design. Nevertheless, the fact remains that technologists 
working for government-funded military agencies created the first 
computer-generated imagery deemed to be fine art objects. An 
analysis of the entries in Computers and Automation  dating from 

FUTURE  CRASHES 29
FIGURE 1.2  United States Army Ballistic Research Laboratories, Tra-
jectories of a Ricocheting Projectile,  1964. Computer-generated, graphed 
on an Electronic Associates, Inc. Dataplotter. Courtesy of the U.S. Army 
Research Laboratory.
1963 to 1965 reveals that large research laboratories associated 
with the military or otherwise dominated computer art production. 
These included the Westernhouse Electric Corporation, Bettis 
Atomic Power Laboratory, California Computer Products, Inc., 
and Calcomp Plotter. Indeed, the military link would persist, in not 
only the development of computer technology but also the funding 
of computer art exhibitions, including in 1968 when the U.S. Air 
Force partly funded computer art’s first international exhibition, 
Cybernetic Serendipity . Within the sciences, there would be little 
surprise if a government-funded laboratory won a competition; 
however, to the art community it appeared particularly objectionable. 

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 30
Fortunately for the artistic community, the publication was a 
specialist trade journal, popular to a small but growing group of 
technologists involved in the computer industry.
As an industry-related special interest journal, Computers and 
Automation  played an important role in popularizing the idea 
of computer art. Through the competition, the journal attracted 
works from all over the world. From 1965, technologists from 
Canada, Germany, London, Italy, and Japan published their work 
in the journal. By 1970, artists from France, Holland, and Sweden 
were also publishing in the journal. In this respect, the contest was 
the first of its kind—self-consciously global—and the only forum 
in the world that published and discussed computer art as a self-
contained category. The journal had a crucial role in connecting the 
growing number of interested technologists and artists. From 1968, 
the journal published the names and addresses of practitioners as a 
way to encourage interaction and communication. In addition, the 
journal was the first medium in which computer artwork was sold. 
The journal published advertising for Compro, a computer printing 
company from New Jersey that sold award-winning prints.
The appearance of Computers and Automation  reveals 
that computer art and its growing discourse was active among 
technologists some years before the first exhibitions. Technologists 
perceived computer art in the context of the flourishing computer 
industry, which had been expanding significantly through the 
early 1960s. Computer art was an extension of the computer 
industry rather than a natural outgrowth of the arts. Although it 
had developed independently of criticism, the computer art project 
was self-sufficient. Within the scope of the periodical, computer art 
had a small but growing audience. It was attracting international 
practitioners and diversifying through competitions and mail-order 
art catalogs. In many ways, computer art was the by-product of 
computer science’s self-confidence, rather than an invention of 
some technologically inspired artistic movement. Like the computer 
hobbyists of the period, individuals who would shape personal 
computing in the 1970s, the computer art practitioners perceived 
what they were doing as amateur rather than professional, 
happenstance rather than ideological.
However, computer art was not to remain within the bounds of 
the insular world of computer engineering for long. In April 1965, the 
first public exhibition of computer art took place in New York. The 
FUTURE  CRASHES 31
New York Times  art critic Stuart Preston opened with: “The wave 
of the future crashes significantly at the Howard Wise Gallery.”7 On 
display were “computer-generated pictures” produced by A. Michael 
Noll and Béla Julesz, two technologists from the Bell Telephone 
Laboratories, which, at the time, was one of the most innovative 
scientific organizations in the world. Research scientists at Bell Labs 
also supplied computer-generated music for an ambient backdrop to 
the art. Only months earlier, at the Technische Hohschule in Stuttgart, 
West Germany, Noll had joined with fellow mathematicians Frieder 
Nake and Georg Nees to produce the first exhibition in Europe. This 
temporal congruence was as much due to exchange of research and 
development between two technologically advanced countries as 
it was about the need to reveal the invention and novelty of recent 
computer research. Initially, the technologists did not intend to 
create fine art. Nevertheless, Julesz was enthusiastic when he found it 
possible to make the electronic computer “produce patterns of some 
originality and interest,” while Noll came to computer-generated 
imagery by accident when a colleague’s microfilm plotter erred and 
produced an unusual linear design, an abstract configuration that held 
a certain aesthetic quality.8 To the mathematician’s surprise, the press, 
television, and art colleges began to take interest in what Nake had 
perceived as “everyday and business.”9 As Nake recounted, “A great 
time started for a young mathematician who had become an artist.”10
Previously, computer art had remained within the confines of the 
technocratic periodical Computers and Automation . Once exhibited 
at the Howard Wise Gallery, however, it was effectively nudged into 
the orthodox art world. Well known for its receptivity to the latest 
technologically based art, the Howard Wise Gallery was a suitable place 
for this experimental art. However, this was no ordinary exposition of 
work created by artists working with new media. Apart from being 
organized by scientists and sponsored by the telecommunications 
giant AT&T, the exhibition was showing art generated by a machine. 
Emerging from the technical sphere, computerized art was inevitably 
set on a collision course with the art community and its well-established 
paradigms of art production and meaning.
From the onset, problems besieged the exhibition. Julesz was not 
pleased with the use of the term “art” in the title of the exhibition 
because the images were stimuli for psychological investigations 
into visual perception. Julesz’ ambivalence was the first in an 
ongoing debate within the computer graphics community about 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 32
the categorization of computer-generated imagery as art. On the 
other hand, Noll was quite comfortable in identifying his works as 
“art” because his production was made “solely for their aesthetic 
or artistic effects.”11 A compromise was reached by titling the 
exhibition Computer-Generated Pictures .
One of the key artworks from the exhibition—the first ever digital 
artwork to be granted copyright status—was Noll’s Gaussian-
Quadratic  (Figure 1.3). It was in the summer of 1962 that A. Michael 
Noll sent a memo to his colleagues at Bell Labs explaining he had 
FIGURE 1.3  A. Michael Noll, Gaussian-Quadratic , 1962–3. IBM 7090, 
Stromberg-Carlson S-C 4020 microfilm plotter. © 1965 A. Michael Noll.

FUTURE  CRASHES 33
generated a “series of interesting and novel patterns” on the IBM 
7090.12 In an attempt to avoid debate or provoke the displeasure of 
his employer, he called his creations “patterns” rather than “art.”13 
This more innocuous term, however, did not hide the importance 
this simple memo held for the history of art. One particular abstract 
pattern in this series held a certain allure for Noll. Investigating 
the visual effects of programmed randomness, Noll had produced 
Gaussian-Quadratic , the mathematical title stemmed from the line 
segments having a Gaussian curve distribution. Noll felt that this 
particular abstract design possessed a resemblance to the Cubist 
infrastructure of Picasso’s Ma Jolie , one of his favorite paintings in 
the Museum of Modern Art collection.
In actuality, much of the ambivalence over whether or not to 
call the work “art” was associated with the initial response by 
AT&T, the parent company of Bell Telephone Laboratories. While 
Gaussian-Quadratic  is celebrated as the first copyrighted piece 
of computer art, in effect the first accepted creative act in which 
the artist has the legal right to control reproduction, the impetus 
for seeking legal status was a result of Bell Labs’ uneasiness with 
the art-making activities of some of its researchers. Essentially, the 
research institution forced the scientists to gain copyright as a way 
to disassociate the work from the scientific research undertaken at 
Bell Labs. As Noll outlines some years later:
Although the research management staff at Bell Labs was very 
supportive of the Howard Wise Gallery exhibit, the legal and 
public relations folks at AT&T became worried that the Bell 
Telephone companies that supported Bell Labs would not view 
computer art as serious scientific research. Hence an effort 
was made by AT&T to halt the exhibit, but it was too late, 
since financial commitments had already been made by Wise. 
Accordingly, Bela and I were told to restrict publicity, and, in an 
attempt to foster such restriction, Bell Labs gave Bela and me 
permission to copyright all the pictures in our own names.14
However, when Noll attempted to register the copyright for Gaussian-
Quadratic  with the Copyright Office at the Library of Congress, 
they refused. Their refusal was on the grounds that a “machine had 
generated the work.”15 Noll patiently explained that a human being 
had written the program that incorporated randomness and order. 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 34
They again declined to register the work, stating that randomness 
was not acceptable. The copyright was finally accepted when Noll 
explained that although the numbers generated by the program 
“appeared ‘random’ to humans, the algorithm generating them was 
perfectly mathematical and not random at all.”16 Nevertheless, by 
registering the copyright, Noll took the position of creative artist, 
which was a designation he continually shunned. Many artists and 
critics, as the technologists admitted, came to resent this blurring of 
the boundaries between art and science.
The initial reaction to the Howard Wise exhibition from artists 
and critics alike was hostile. But not all of the reviews were written 
with disdain. Noll believed that Stuart Preston’s New York Times  
article has some positives. However, on a close reading of the article, 
the tone of the piece expressed a reservation and discernible regret 
that future art would be “entrusted to the deus ex machina .”17 Perhaps 
an age had arrived in which the artist would become subsidiary to 
the machine—a mere idiot servant to an art-making robot. Although 
the exhibition was a significant landmark, and it generated a certain 
amount of technical interest, the criticism ranged from “cool 
indifference to open derision.”18 Preston described the imagery as 
“bleak.”19 The reviewer in Time  magazine noted that the pictures 
on display not only resembled “the notch patterns found on IBM 
cards” but also had “about the same amount of aesthetic appeal.”20 
The New York Herald Tribune  denounced the works as “cold and 
soulless,” a criticism that would continue to haunt future computer 
art.21 Most artists, as Goodman noted, believed the medium had not 
proved itself “accessible or refined enough to venture into.”22 While 
the Howard Wise Gallery was the premier commercial venue for 
presenting art and technology, receiving much press and attention, 
none of the work sold.23 Noll admitted in retrospect that the public 
and media’s response was “disappointing.”24
This response was not confined to the United States. Tellingly, 
computer art received a uniform response across the world, which 
was both apathetic and dismissive. In West Germany, the artistic 
community responded with distrust on seeing the first examples 
of computer art; they were “nervous, hostile, furious,” as Nake 
recollected.25 The critical response to the first computer art exhibition 
in 1965 in Stuttgart, West Germany, was effectively the same as that 
in the United States. Even in Japan, the artistic community was 
apprehensive. Haruki Tsuchiya observed that artists who were not 
FUTURE  CRASHES 35
computer professionals were extremely suspicious of computer art.26
When computer art moved from the relative safety of the 
technocratic domain to the intensive critical environment of the art 
world, it created inevitable frisson. The general antagonism between 
the scientific and artistic communities, what Goodman called the 
“uneasy liaison,” pervaded the early commentary on the emerging 
art form.27 Over the following five years, these hostilities were 
played out in science-based publications, which tended to depict the 
technologist as a zealous scientist forging new artistic paths, while 
the artist, characterized as defiant and lacking fortitude, languished 
in the doldrums of technological ignorance, as first witnessed in the 
Rockman and Mezei article. Herbert W. Franke, the first to write 
a full history of the computer art movement, recognized that the 
computer, as an art maker, had raised and exposed many problems, 
and only members of the scientific community, the commentator 
believed, had the language, awareness, and skill to approach the 
new form.28 Those who presented themselves as art pundits, as 
Franke outlined, increasingly needed to give way to “scientists, 
mathematicians, and technicians who, becoming involved in the 
discussions … injected new energy into the field.”29 In response, 
the artist and critic felt that the scientist was trespassing on their 
ground; they saw the scientist’s work as dull and lifeless, evidence of 
aesthetic ineptitude. The aesthetician Robert E. Mueller concluded 
his 1967 book The Science of Art  with this exact sentiment:
The fact that computer specialists and scientists who work in 
the visual realm have little or no detectable knowledge of the 
tradition of artistic visual work makes most of their work entirely 
without artistic meaning and completely sterile visually.  … If they 
insist on working in the direction of purely design orders, it is 
not easy to see how they can make anything of more meaning 
than natural orders like snowflakes.30
Once placed in historical context, the reasons for this mounting 
antagonism become clearer. The technologies, employed to create 
this so-called art, originated from the military and industrial 
laboratories. The scientist and technologist were introducing the 
ultra-rational and now semi-autonomous computer into a domain 
broadly dominated by romantic and existential humanism, which 
held artistic genius and human intuition to be the cornerstones 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 36
of creativity. Moreover, the first exhibition took place not in a 
provincial gallery, but in New York City, the center of the avant-
garde art world. Whether they liked it or not, New York critics were 
forced to reconcile with this new art form.
The critics’ unease and suspicion must be understood through the 
frame of pre-existing ideologies that inform the development of the 
modern digital computer, concepts that enviably form the basis of 
the new art form. The figures who became the very first practitioners 
of computer art—the technologists—were imbued with a particular 
type of technocratic spirit, a twentieth-century mindset that is 
characterized by a firm belief in the technical powers of rationality, 
efficiency, and order. The technocratic spirit finds its roots in the 
mechanical efficiencies of Taylorism and Fordism that emerged early 
in the century. While a technocratic spirit can be identified in early 
twentieth-century art (for example, in the dogmatic techno-inspired 
yearnings in manifestos of the Italian Futurists, or in the utopian 
rhetoric of the Constructivists and their desire to engineer a new 
world order), computer art in North America was philosophically 
tied to those often esoteric theories, such as cybernetics and 
information theory, that informed American science and technology.
Even more deeply ingrained within the technologists was the 
belief in the pre-eminence of science. The ideology of scientism 
that spread among American intellectuals in the post-war years 
held that scientific method constitutes the most authoritative 
worldview. Following the wars, science came to be organized in 
the manner of the industrial corporation. Big Science, as it began 
to be termed, employed the model of research organization that 
proved so successful during the wars. Understood primarily in 
military terms, science and technology were viewed as strategic 
national resources. Universities would be brought into the orbit of 
the military-industrial complex, transforming much of the academic 
research into an industrialized type of knowledge production. These 
large, well-funded, multi disciplinary research laboratories, and the 
scientists and technologists that formed them, would capture the 
public’s imagination, becoming visionaries—the ingenious builders 
of tomorrow.
Perhaps the most evocative and influential figure to the 
technologists of North America was the father of modern computing, 
John von Neumann, a Hungarian-born mathematician who 
dominated intellectual life in the fields of science and technology 
FUTURE  CRASHES 37
following World War II. During the war, von Neumann was an 
adviser on American government projects that developed strategic 
instruments for the war effort, including the infamous Manhattan 
Project. Neumann’s scientific defense work included work on the 
high-speed computing machine ENIAC, which was developed by 
the Ballistic Research Laboratories, the same military laboratory 
that would win the prize for best computer artwork. Through the 
war, technoscience experts, such as von Neumann, were increasingly 
associated with the military as well as with the powerful private 
corporations that serviced it. As intellectual figures, they fostered 
and embodied the technological optimism and belief in technological 
mastery that permeated the period. In popular wartime imagery, the 
scientist and the engineer appeared as heroic figures, building the 
advanced technology that would win the war. In post-war writing, 
the scientist was presented, according to historians Andrew Jamison 
and Ron Eyerman, “as a man apart, a great man of thought and 
ideas, more a magician than a technician.”31
The prestige of the technologist expanded in many circles during 
the Cold War period, as military laboratories emerged as world 
leaders in computing technology. The Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), which funded the majority of the growth 
in computer science, became the foremost sponsor of research into 
artificial intelligence. The Vietnam War and NASA increased the 
need for computing power, which resulted in significant growth and 
prosperity for the computer industry, including the burgeoning use 
of computers in business. As a consequence, IBM produced most of 
the world’s computers. Almost exclusively, IBM machines generated 
the computer art of the 1960s.
However, this technocratic spirit that developed early in the 
century and gathered pace over the course of the world wars was 
not universally held, especially for those in the humanities. The 
memories of atomic clouds rising over Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
resonated deeply within intellectual and artistic circles. In the 
immediate post-war period, some intellectuals and artists were swept 
up in a wave of existential humanism, inspired by Sartre and others. 
Pessimism and collective despondency toward technology spread, 
with some commentators increasingly demonizing the implicit 
desires of science and technology. Social critics were reacting not 
only against the atrocities of two world wars, but also against the 
perceived loss of human qualities in a society increasingly under 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 38
the sway of technological logic. In 1952, the American social critic 
and humanist Lewis Mumford lamented man’s “worship of the 
machine.”32 According to Mumford, the scientific revolution had 
brought about a paradoxical effect of mechanizing humanity. “We 
have created a topsy-turvy world,” Mumford mourns, in which 
machines became “autonomous” while men became “servile and 
mechanical.”33 People, as Mumford described, are so involved in 
the process of mechanization that “a large part of our fantasies 
are no longer self-begotten: they have no reality, no viability, until 
they are harnessed to the machine.”34 For Mumford, machines in 
industrialized society had alienated human beings and disconnected 
them from nature. In similar fashion, the influential Canadian media 
critic Marshall McLuhan “mourned the effects of the mechanistic 
way of modern life.”35 McLuhan similarly observed that America’s 
technological society “vitiated family life and the free human 
expression of thought and feelings.”36
The age of technological enthusiasm that initially dominated 
post-war America began to decline through the 1960s. Large parts of 
society rejected the rationality and hegemony of military production 
and technocratic modes of thought. Instead of sentimentalizing 
America’s key role in the age of science and technology, the writers 
and philosophers of the 1960s counterculture probed the depth and 
extent of a society dominated by technology. In the same year that 
computer art began to be popularized, influential writers published a 
critical response to post-industrial technology. In 1964, for example, 
Herbert Marcuse argued in One-Dimensional Man  that systems of 
production in modern capitalist and socialist societies repress the 
spirit and constrain the freedom of individuals.37 The same year 
also marks Jacques Ellul’s influential publication The Technological 
Society , which argues that modern societies, regardless of ideology, 
are subjugated by “technical phenomenon.”38 By being a type of 
slave to technique, Ellul believed, man was reduced to a technical 
animal. Likewise, Marshall McLuhan, who was widely read in 
North America, published in 1964 Understanding Media , a book 
that argued that technology was a force that appeared to reduce 
society to the “sex organs of the machine world.”39
Stemming from their academic training and traditions, art critic 
Jack Burnham noted that “many art critics considered themselves 
‘humanists’ with strong feelings concerning the encroachments 
of technology on nature and cultural traditions.”40 For those 
FUTURE  CRASHES 39
who lamented the cruel mechanized dystopia of the world 
wars, or the epic destruction made possible by the atomic age, a 
computerized form of art would appear particularly repugnant, 
even contemptible. As the cultural critique of technology spread 
in the early 1960s, paralleling the intensification of the Cold War 
and the escalation of the Vietnam War, the computer became a 
highly visible and threatening symbol of a social order increasingly 
dehumanized by technology. Nake, who was politically active in 
the late 1960s, acutely felt the growing perception of the computer 
as the Cold War technology par excellence . Dissatisfied with the 
direction of computer technology and feeling the pressure of his 
politically engaged peers, he eventually renounced computer art 
in 1971.41
However, it was not just the appearance of this new powerful 
and once secretive machine that was the problem at the Howard 
Wise exhibition; it was the encroachment of science into the world 
of art. In all the critics’ responses, there is a palpable fear that 
computer art and its scientific creators would destabilize the basic 
categories and cultural positioning of art. Scientists were perceived 
as overconfident, presumptuous, and even boastful, while their 
reductionist techniques of reducing art to code appeared to lack 
all artistic sensibility. For many humanists, such an exhibition was 
another example of the progressivist march of science and its applied 
realm: technology. As the early criticism demonstrates, computer 
art exhibitions were spaces where scientists and technologists were 
making bold incursion into lands once clearly demarcated and 
culturally divided. For the cultural warriors, computer art was 
more an act of war than a birth of a new medium.
As the first technologists began to experiment with the computer 
as a possible art-making device, the cultural rift between science 
and the humanities was becoming a public debate. In 1959, with 
the publication of his lecture The Two Cultures , C. P. Snow brought 
the polarity between the humanities and science and the associated 
epistemological tension into sharp focus.42 The English social critic 
blamed the widening gulf as a major impediment to solving some 
of Western society’s intractable problems. However, Snow’s most 
pointed criticism was aimed at the artistic-literary tradition, which 
he characterized as antiquated and increasingly obsolete, especially 
considering the enormous debt twentieth-century society owed 
to science and technology. Most provocatively, Snow, a trained 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 40
physicist, announced that “scientists have the future in their bones,” 
while “traditional culture” wished that “the future did not exist.”43 
For Snow, literary intellectuals were “natural Luddites” who had 
little understanding and appreciation for advanced science and 
technology. Computer art became a cipher for Snow’s rigid cultural 
divide. The first historian of computer art, Herbert W. Franke, who 
was a scientist himself, mirrored Snow’s argument. For Franke, 
the rejection of the computer by the arts was “caused by a lack 
of understanding and even a distinct rejection of the technical 
side of modern life.”44 Rockman and Mezei’s article, as mentioned 
above, characterized the scientist and technologist as optimistic, 
progressive, and future-orientated, effectively ascending over the 
languid, ignorant, and narrow-minded visual art community.
The impact of Snow’s lecture and subsequent publications, 
including his 1965 response to critics of his perceived cultural 
dichotomy, The Two Cultures: A Second Look , was extensive. 
A myriad of publications followed in which the rupture in 
cultural discourse was reinforced or rejected. Nevertheless, Snow’s 
generalizations became the framework from which the debate was 
contested. Simplistic stereotypes were offered: science is concerned 
with objectivity; art with subjectivity. Science was commonly 
considered a process of uncovering the deep structures of nature 
through rational, provable means. Appearing in opposition to science, 
art was concerned with the subconscious, intuition, and chance.
György Kepes, the Hungarian émigré artist who would have 
such a wide-ranging impact on art and design education in the 
United States, first at the Illinois Institute of Technology under the 
leadership of László Moholy-Nagy then later as the founder of Center 
for Advanced Visual Studies at MIT, had experienced this particular 
culture war firsthand. He wrote in 1965 that in “no other area of 
contemporary civilization are claims and counter-claims made with 
such vehemence, such offensive and defensive rigidity.”45 During the 
1950s, Kepes believed that culture had in fact bifurcated, resulting 
in intense suspicion of any scientific endeavor in the arts. As a way 
to overcome the art world’s reticence toward science, Kepes wrote 
The New Landscape in Art and Science  (1956). But on its release, 
the publication was poorly received by his contemporaries. Some art 
magazines refused to review the book because, as critic and artist 
Douglas Davis wrote, “art and science are unmixable entities.”46 
By the 1960s, Kepes had become increasingly disenchanted with 
FUTURE  CRASHES 41
what he perceived as insularity and biases of artists. He believed 
that artists, lacking any real orientation to the contemporary 
world, closed themselves off to the wider world by forming small 
intimate circles. In doing so, artists missed the “vital connections 
with contemporary intellectual and technological reality.”47 Kepes, 
despondent at the art world’s intractability, felt that any real 
collaboration between the disciplines was “improbable.”48
Although Snow’s essay reinforced simmering prejudices, 
the central tenet behind the Two Cultures  lecture was to remedy 
the perceived social and intellectual disjuncture. The history to the 
perception of difference between science and art, often located in 
the rise of modernism and the will to demarcate in absolute terms 
each domain, was congruous with the history that attempts to unify 
the two cultures.49 In The Two Cultures: A Second Look , Snow 
optimistically suggested that a “third culture” would emerge and 
close the gulf between the scientists and literary intellectuals. This 
resulted in a number of publications on the possible emergence of 
a third culture, where professionals, with a growing awareness and 
wider spectrum of knowledge, would breach the gap between the 
two.50 In contrast, only a few social commentators argued for the 
further separation and bifurcation of culture or that the conflicts 
between art and science cannot be overcome.51 Through the 
1960s, a significant amount of literature from the arts and sciences 
prescribed various ways to reconcile the two cultural monoliths. 
They ranged from reforming pedagogical practices to heightening 
interdisciplinary engagement. Many, however, simply looked to 
define the commonalities between art and science.
From the outset, computer art was promoted as a possible model 
for cultural convergence. Mirroring Snow’s dichotomy, Franke 
wrote, “One of the most important effects of computer art is that 
it actively encourages the bringing together of the two cultures—
the technical, and the humanistic and literary.”52 In the coming 
decades, computer art discourse would be infused with the belief 
that its practice somehow overcame the internecine elements within 
the cultural divide—that somehow the project was the ultimate 
synthesis of science, technology, and art.
Where Snow’s critique perhaps fails is in its lack of 
acknowledgment of the use of science and technology by European 
artists. In the early 1950s, Hungarian-born artist Victor Vasarely 
emphasized the need for a creative synthesis between art and 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 42
science. Following Vasarely’s quasi-scientific approaches to making 
art and abandoning traditional handmade methods of production, 
like-minded artists began forming in Western Europe and South 
America. Intense experimentation with new media and production 
methods followed the first major post-war kinetic exhibition, Le 
Mouvement , in 1955.
The first large group was Zero, which Otto Piene and Heinz 
Mack founded in Düsseldorf in 1957. Beyond the idea of starting 
anew, which was implied in the name, the aim of the group was 
to employ the latest technologies with a romantic and intuitive 
approach. Other groups with similar tendencies, but who found 
Zero too romantic and idealistic, gathered under the label New 
Tendency ( Novelle Tendence ), a movement that would influence 
many sectors of European art. This broader movement emerged 
from an exhibition in 1961 held by Groupe de Recherche d’Art 
Visuel (GRAV), which was organized by Matko Mestrovic and 
others, in Zagreb, Yugoslavia. Individuals in GRAV, who wrote 
a Charter of Foundation , advocated a scientific approach to new 
materials. Overall, the members of New Tendency shared a cool 
scientific tone.
The artists who had formed these groups emerged from European 
and Latin American academies. Commonly, they wanted to make a 
science of art by systematically analyzing perception and putting to 
use the new materials and mechanical instruments that gave modern 
science its unique dynamism. For the science-orientated artist, the 
practice of subjective interpretation was replaced by the techniques 
of observation and scientific-styled investigations. Through their 
research and experimentation, they attempted to invent new forms 
of visualization that revealed a new awareness of perception, a 
field previously considered the exclusive domain of science. As a 
historical precedence, the use of empirical methodology of science 
would become a crucial feature of computer art.
Although these new pseudoscience movements gained 
substantial popularity, Nouvelle Tendence was not, as Douglas 
Davis stated, “universally admired.”53 As Lea Vergine wrote, critics 
saw the artwork as a “profane, technological and para-scientific 
exercise.”54 In the early 1960s, the shift toward science waned, 
with many groups folding. Davis cites 1963 as the beginning of 
the end for the “group renaissance.”55 GRAV called a meeting in 
Paris, which was attended by more than 30 artists, all related to 
FUTURE  CRASHES 43
Novelle Tendence. Although the meeting was “noisy, vigorous, and 
optimistic,” the following years saw each group falter.56 Vergine says 
that technologically inspired art had “started out in the scientific 
laboratory and ended up in the boutique: the stoical longing for 
the golden proportion had given way to Biedermeier.”57 When the 
exhibition The Responsive Eye  was held in New York in 1965, 
which was computer art’s inaugural year, it was quite clear to the 
European artists “that the game was over.”58
The Art and Technology movement in the United States emerged 
some years after the decline of New Tendency in Europe. Douglas 
Davis mused: “The torch carried so long by the Europeans passed 
now—for a brief time, at least—to the Americans, who seized 
upon esoteric materials and methods with a zest approaching the 
uncritical.”59 As the statement concedes, differences arose between 
the movements. The United States’ Art and Technology movement 
was far “more self-conscious” and formalized than its European 
counterparts.60 Following the Two Cultures  debate, there was a 
conscious effort to join cultural disparities by forming cooperatives 
and fostering a climate conducive to collaboration. These alliances 
were encouraged to deal directly with large private and government 
institutions. In Europe, the artist held a more autonomous 
position, embarking on research within artist collectives, rather 
than collaborations funded by the government, the military, or 
corporations.
In the late 1960s, significant cultural resources were dedicated 
to joining art and technology. Even established art historians, 
such as Jack Burnham, championed the potential union of art and 
technology.61 Between 1966 and 1972, several large-scale exhibitions 
took place internationally, including at prominent galleries in the 
United States, such as the Museum of Modern Art, Los Angeles 
County Museum of Art, Corcoran Gallery, and Walker Art Center. 
The most significant exhibition was The Machine: As Seen at the End 
of the Mechanical Age , which sought to historicize the intersection 
between art and technology. Curated by Swedish art historian K. 
G. Pontus Hulten, the exhibition represented an extensive survey, 
including the art of some 100 artists. Drawings by Leonardo da 
Vinci, experimental media since 1950, and contemporary works 
commissioned and overseen by EAT were included. The other 
major exhibition to have international exposure was Cybernetic 
Serendipity . Curated by Jasia Reichardt, it used cybernetic theory as 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 44
the overarching theme to explore nascent computer and electronic 
technologies. Universally, these large-scale exhibitions exploited an 
assortment of different technologies and media to focus attention 
on the transformative powers of science and technology.
Yet the romance with science and technology in the United 
States can be traced even earlier in the 1960s. Although spasmodic 
at first, groups like USCO (or The Us Company), which formed 
in 1962 in Garnerville, New York, toured widely with multimedia 
performances and environments. The group saw technology as a 
means of bringing people together in a type of modern tribalism, an 
idea taken from McLuhan. In McLuhan-styled rhetoric, the artists 
wrote in the Kunst Licht Kunst  catalog: “We are all one, beating the 
tribal drum of our new electronic environment.”62
The real escalation in interest took place in October 1966 when 
avant-garde artist Robert Rauchenberg joined with Billy Klüver, a 
Swedish physicist working at Bell Laboratories, to stage a series of 
unique collaborative performances between artists and engineers 
at New York’s 69th Regiment Armory. Because the venue had 
housed the famed 1913 Armory Show that brought modern art 
to the United States, the event was viewed auspiciously. The Nine 
Evenings: Theatre and Engineering  involved the collaboration of 
40 engineers and 10 avant-garde artists. Together they created 
an elaborate theatre, dance, and musical performance. It was 
an enormous undertaking, with 3,000 hours of engineering 
time required. The event was soon followed by the founding 
of Experiments in Art and Technology (EAT) by Klüver and 
Rauschenberg. EAT was established to promote collaborative 
work between artists and engineers. The opening meeting, held 
early in 1967 at Rauschenberg’s loft in Manhattan, was attended 
by a variety of artists and scientists, including representatives from 
AT&T and IBM. Klüver believed that beyond improving the status 
and respectability of artists in society, art could become a vehicle to 
change the direction of technology. EAT and the other organizations 
supposed that through collaboration they could direct and control 
the forces of cultural change in an ethical and just way.
Other well-known avant-garde artists, like John Cage, also 
sought to remove those cultural barriers that pushed artist and 
engineer apart. He voiced a common feeling among a small 
group of artists, all open to advanced technology, that they could 
transform the social order. As Edward Shanken has written, Cage 
FUTURE  CRASHES 45
tried to counteract what he perceived as the “deleterious effects 
of technology—such as the destructiveness of war and industrial 
pollution—by appropriating it for beneficial aesthetic purposes 
which would infiltrate engineering and reform industry.”63 
Technology and capitalist industry were joined together as an 
ideological front. The shared belief was that the technocracy could 
be countered by the revolutionary figure of the artist, who was the 
only one capable of humanizing technology.
Although computer art predated the Art and Technology 
movement in the United States, its popularity was inevitably linked 
to the expanded movement. The desire for cultural unity and 
the humanization of technology provide immediate similarities. 
Computer technology was often an intrinsic part of the Art and 
Technology exhibitions, as, for example, in Jack Burnham’s 1970s 
Software  exhibition. Although the computer became an important 
functional and symbolic technology within the movement, the 
computer art project often had divergent aims and characteristics. 
For example, in Art and Technology exhibits, the computer 
functioned within the museum space on an experiential and 
metaphorical level: the actual computer was part of the artwork. 
Within these exhibitions, the computer was taken out of its original 
functional context; in contrast, computer art exhibitions often only 
displayed the static images in isolation from the computer, which 
remained in the university or commercial laboratories. Whereas Art 
and Technology artists examined the aesthetic visual possibilities 
of science and technology, computer artists focused on production 
value of the apparatus itself. Art and Technology had no discernible 
relationship with any single technology, whereas computer art 
privileged the computer above all other media—it was the practical 
and spiritual core of the movement. But what set Art and Technology 
apart from computer art was the moral questioning of the processes 
and outcomes of science and technology. Trained as engineers and 
scientists, the first computer artists had no desire to look deeply 
at the social implications of the computer; rather they preferred 
to isolate the computer from its social setting and investigate the 
computer as a revolutionary image maker.
For Art and Technology organizations like EAT, computer art 
remained, as Franke asserts, “only of peripheral concern.”64 EAT 
and the avant-garde artists who supported it were interested in 
large speculative and experimental projects involving the latest 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 46
technologies. By the late 1960s, the majority of computer art being 
produced was image-based, and most common was the plotter-
drawn static image, what many today call the computer-generated 
print. This format brought it closer to the traditional arts than the 
large-scale, electronic media artworks of EAT. From the beginning, 
technologists have attempted to conform to their understanding 
of what constituted art—as something that was flat, portable, and 
could be hung on a wall. This type of media mimicry, of course, was 
not new. The inventors of photography, Nicéphore Niépce, Louis 
Daguerre, and William Fox Talbot, also adapted the photographic 
image to the pictorial framing traditions of painting. As a result 
of this remediation, small-scale plotter and photographic images 
made up the first exhibitions in both New York and West Germany 
in 1965. Although the scientists were seen as mere amateurs 
dabbling in the visual arts, they soon produced images with striking 
similarities to artistic movements of the day.
Of all the art movements of the 1960s, conceptual art is the 
one most aligned with computer art. In Art of the Electronic Age , 
Popper places one of the origins of computer art in the rise of 
conceptual art; he cites Christine Tamblyn’s article “Computer 
Art as conceptual art,” which argued that because “computers 
were designed to augment mental process, as opposed to 
being visual or manual aids,” they were more suited to mental 
conceptualization.65 One could conclude that computer art became 
a category in its own right before conceptual art. Conceptual art 
was only formalized by critics and practitioners in the late 1960s. 
Henry Flynt’s conception of “concept art” varied in many ways 
from LeWitt’s later definition of “conceptual art,” which solidified 
in meaning through the 1967 essay “Paragraphs on conceptual 
art.” By the late 1960s, computer art had already been exhibited, 
and its discourse, interdisciplinary as it was, was well established. 
Nevertheless, the idea and term “concept art,” like “computer 
art,” was first employed in written form in 1963, and both were 
broadly transcultural and system-orientated.66 As early as 1962, 
Umberto Eco had coined the term “programmed art” to describe 
the new formalized trends in European art. “Programmed art” 
was often used as a blanket term for optical art and gestalt art 
and located its genealogy in modernist art practices. For art critic 
Guido Ballo, programmed art’s heritage existed in the rigors 
of Neo-Plastic abstraction and constructivism. Like conceptual 
FUTURE  CRASHES 47
art in Europe and America, computer art appealed to the same 
concepts of objectivity and the will to detach the art object from 
the idea.
Aesthetically, the idioms of conceptual and computer art were 
often identical. In the same year as Noll exhibited his computer 
series at the Howard Wise Gallery, Sol LeWitt, one of the 
dominant exponents and theorizers of conceptual art, also began 
completing serial-based work. Seriality relied on the application 
of organizational schemes or systems that engender a number 
of possible visual sequences. Similarly, systems and algorithmic 
procedures, along with the production of different visual sequences, 
provided the basis for the computer-generated artworks exhibited 
at the Howard Wise Gallery. Within LeWitt’s pseudoscientific 
methodology, there was a central place for mathematics. The 
conceptual artist viewed mathematics as a technique to both 
configure the object and avoid subjectivity. Both conceptual and 
minimalist art employed simple mathematical structures widely. 
Donald Judd, for example, employed mathematical calculations 
or principles of seriality rather than subjective judgments when 
creating his sculptural form. Empirical in nature, his process sought 
to obviate signs of personal decision by making mathematical 
sequence correspond with compositional arrangement.
Another major corollary between computer and conceptual art 
was the importance of the algorithmic procedure. The algorithm 
remained the foundational tenet of computer art. Here, LeWitt 
outlines his conceptual schema and methodology:
To work with a plan that is pre-set is one way of avoiding 
subjectivity. It also obviates the necessity for designing each 
work in turn. The plan would design the work. Some plans 
would require millions of variations, and some a limited number, 
but both are finite. Other plans imply infinity. In each case 
however, the artist would select the basic form and rules that 
would govern the solution to the problem. After that the fewer 
decisions made in the course of completing the work, the better. 
This eliminates the arbitrary, the capricious, and the subjective 
as much as possible.67
Selecting the “basic form and rules that would govern the solution 
to the problem,” as LeWitt wrote above, describes perfectly the 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 48
algorithm procedure. Moreover, the algorithmic idea is behind his 
famous phrase: “The idea becomes a machine that makes the art.”68 
LeWitt’s first Wall Drawings  produced a predetermined drawing 
system for generating lines. A prearranged sequence provided each 
work with its particular self-propelling mechanism, which served 
as a structuring device. As LeWitt stipulates, “art is about not 
making choices. It’s in making an initial choice of, say, a system, 
and letting the system do the work.”69 It meant that all of the 
“planning and decisions are made beforehand and the execution 
is a perfunctory affair.”70 Producing a system that was prefigured, 
visually unpredictable, and autonomous was entirely consistent 
with the aims of computer art.
Another commonality between conceptual and computer art was 
the suppression of authorial presence. Conceptual artists decoupled 
the relationship between the art object and artist by mitigating all 
personal signs of invention. The artist became detached from the 
idea of personalized draftsmanship by installing a predetermined 
system—a type of instruction for another to follow. That way there 
was, as LeWitt states, no “dependence on the skill of the artist as a 
craftsman.”71 Effectively any person could carry out the instructions. 
The same process was at work in computer art, where artists devised 
a predetermined drawing algorithm for the computer automaton to 
carry out the instruction. The human agent initiated the conceptual 
form, and a machine actuated it. Likewise, the computer artwork 
lacked any autographic mark, trace of spontaneity, or artistic 
authenticity. The plotter arm would replace the human arm in the 
production process.
The parallel use of permutation series, mathematical, and 
generative systems has meant that the computer and conceptual 
artist have produced strikingly similar works. This correlation is 
evidenced in the early 1970s work of Manfred Mohr and LeWitt. 
Approximately a year after Mohr completed his Cubic Limit  works 
(Figure 1.4), LeWitt exhibited his Variations of Incomplete Open 
Cubes  (Figure 1.5). LeWitt’s art was described by Donald Kuspit as 
having “the look of thought,” while Mohr’s works were perceived 
by computer art critics as “stimulants for the mind.”72 Both are 
serial projects, sharing mechanistic rationalism, clinical detachment, 
and the use of algorithmic generative processes. Both art objects 
emerge from the seemingly infinite possibilities contained in the 
construction and deconstruction of the cube. Although Mohr’s 
FUTURE  CRASHES 49
FIGURE 1.4  Manfred Mohr, P-154-C, 1973. Plotter drawing on paper, 
23.6 × 23.6 in. Courtesy of the artist.
work was conceptual, paralleling and prefiguring much of LeWitt’s 
cubic work, Mohr did not gain the attention of art historians and 
critics, such as Rosalind Krauss, Lucy Lippard, or Donald Kuspit, 
who all wrote on LeWitt’s cubic work. It appears that although 
Mohr’s work was exploring the current theoretical ground of 
contemporary art, the critics prejudged such work on the grounds 
of its computational basis.
When one compares computer art and conceptual art from 
the late 1960s period, their aesthetics are exceedingly similar, 
even without reference to their similar methodologies. In LeWitt’s 
words, conceptual art was “emotionally dry” and looked “hard and 
industrial.”73 Computer art evoked similar descriptions from critics. 
While conceptualism emptied art of its subjective content, bringing 

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 50
about austere aesthetics, in the 1960s, mainstream art was still 
influenced by the reductive logic of late modernism. In movements 
such as minimalism and hard-edge abstraction, the art was often 
characterized by impersonal order, regularities, repetitions, and 
rigorous standardization. During the 1960s, as critic and art 
historian Don Denny records:
there came to prominence a kind of painting and sculpture 
which shows geometric organization; inorganic, constructive 
relationship of parts; arrangements derived from arbitrary, 
predetermined methods. Edges are firm, surfaces smooth, areas 
discrete, colour systems drastically minimized or schematized. 
The most immediate psychic tone of these works is one of 
detachment, calculation, an impersonal and impenetrable 
coolness.74FIGURE 1.5  Sol LeWitt, Variations of Incomplete Open Cubes  (photo -
graphic component), 1974. 11.75 × 16.5 in. © 2013 The LeWitt Estate/
Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York. Image courtesy of the Wadsworth 
Atheneum Museum of Art, Hartford, CT.

FUTURE  CRASHES 51
For Denny, the art implied an “alliance with, or comparability 
to, the appearances of scientific technology.”75 The “spirit of 
planning,” the “rational contrivance,” and “fine calibration,” to 
use the critic’s descriptions of abstract paintings, corresponded 
directly to the methods and general aesthetics of computer art.76 
Therefore, it appeared contradictory and a little unjust when art 
critics condemned the geometric shapes and basic linear designs of 
computer art. On an aesthetic level, as previously demonstrated, the 
work shared all the reductive characteristics of conceptual art and 
hard-edged geometric painting of the era. Of course, most of the 
critics were not judging the aesthetics, rather they were castigating 
the machine that produced them. Douglas Davis felt a similar 
sentiment at work in the critical response to the larger-scale Art and 
Technology exhibitions. “It seems clear,” as Davis wrote in 1975, 
“that the moral fervour implicit in the attacks on technology by 
many social and literary critics are not based in aesthetic disgust 
alone.”77 When the critic from the New York Herald Tribune  
described the work in the Howard Wise exhibition as “cold and 
soulless,” he was imagining the machine more than the art. There 
was little attempt to adequately interpret the work, to provide a 
deeper understanding and appreciation for this new form. Quick 
to judge, the critics asserted a type of dogmatic judgment based 
on their prejudice toward the computer. It lacked a sophisticated 
treatment of art, a considered insight that good criticism often 
possesses. Admittedly, computer art was rudimentary, similar in its 
simplicity to perspective systems in the early Renaissance or the 
first grainy photographs of the nineteenth century, yet a fair critical 
response would have been sensitive to the incredible difficulties of 
employing computers to make art. It could be said in defense of the 
art critics that they were ignorant, as many were, of the challenges 
the new medium posed. Critics were simply ill-prepared for the 
advent of computer art.
On another level, the independent use of the computer and its 
allied electronic devices in place of conventional art materials, or the 
rejection of the representational methods of the past, would seem to 
correlate to the wider rejection of modernist convention circulating 
through 1960s art theory. As Rosalind Krauss observed, “More 
than a rejection or dissolution of the past, avant-garde originality is 
conceived as a literal origin, a beginning from ground zero, a birth.”78 
Computer art could have been celebrated by the art theorists and 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 52
critics as a birth of a radically new movement with an alternative 
medium. Yet, for all its congruence with mainstream and avant-
garde movements, computer art was shunned. As demonstrated, this 
alienation was not based on the questionable abstract aesthetics, 
but on the conscious or unconscious estrangement felt toward the 
computer itself, which was shared by both mainstream critic and 
traditional artist alike.
However, there were inherent differences between computer art 
and the avant-garde movements of the day. One of the defining 
features of 1960s computer art is the technologist as practitioner. 
Because computer art emerged from the sciences, the technologist 
was not familiar with the language of avant-garde discourse, let 
alone the terminology of the larger field of visual arts. The different 
approaches and styles of writing are clearly apparent in the criticism 
and commentary on computer art. Even though it would have been 
possible to theorize computer art in conceptual terms, there was 
no attempt to do so. Indeed, computer enthusiasts took little from 
contemporary art theory, and when they spoke of art it was directed 
toward early modernist abstraction. Nor did the technologists seek 
to declare or occupy a position, or formulate a manifesto of any 
type. They did not possess the revolutionary aspect or the intellectual 
rigor of the avant-garde. In the very beginning, computer art had 
none of the self-critical reflexivity that defines the conceptual art 
movement. Conceptual art was a meta-critical and self-reflexive 
venture, which focused critical attention upon all facets of the 
art world, including the notion of the artist within a cultural and 
historical context, the reimagining of the exhibition and museum 
space, and the denunciation of the art market and its capitalist 
structures. While computer art did implicitly question the status of 
the art object, the movement was not self-consciously ideological.
Although the 1960s was a decade of tremendous social 
upheaval and cultural change, the radical politics that permeated 
the period did not infiltrate or affect the idiom of computer art. 
The practitioners of computer art were far less political than their 
counterparts in the Art and Technology movement. As Shanken 
showed, there was far more “common ground” between Art and 
Technology and conceptual art.79 The computer artist shared none 
of the grand visions and ideological underpinnings of Klüzer, Cage, 
and Rauschenberg. Computer artists did not attempt to liberate 
culture from repressive and alienating technologies. As Jasia 
FUTURE  CRASHES 53
Reichardt observed in 1968, computer art was far removed from 
those “polemic preoccupations” that concerned art.80
Even when computer and conceptual art seemed to be almost 
identical in appearance, as in the LeWitt and Mohr examples, there 
were a number of essential differences. In LeWitt’s work, the tension 
of the work arises from the relationship between the idea and its 
physical realization. For Mohr, in contrast, it resides in the potential 
of the computer algorithm and its power to generate vast amounts 
of signs. Beyond the central philosophical differences, there were 
several instrumental distinctions. In addition, Mohr focused on the 
exploration of one media, while LeWitt’s project involved a variety 
of media, such as text, diagram, sculpture, and photography.
The most substantial difference, however, is the dissociation by 
LeWitt and most other conceptual artists with the reductivism and 
rationalism of mathematics. As LeWitt stipulated, conceptual art does 
not have “much to do with mathematics, philosophy, or any other 
mental discipline.”81 In his writings, the artist carefully maneuvers 
his notion of conceptual art away from any suggestion of intellectual 
rationality by stipulating that “conceptual art is not necessarily 
logical.”82 He went on to emphasize that conceptual artists are 
“mystics rather than rationalists. They leap to conclusions that logic 
cannot reach.”83 There was a deliberate effort on the part of LeWitt to 
distance the artistic practice from scientific methods, whereas Mohr’s 
computational technique was rigorous, logical, and highly reductive. 
Additionally, LeWitt dismissed randomness, a process central to the 
practice of computer art. The conceptual artist explored his idea 
thoroughly, so that “arbitrary or chance decisions would be kept to 
a minimum.”84 In contrast, computer art, through its preoccupation 
with pseudorandom behavior, had a multifaceted open-endedness 
not shared with most conceptual art. Whereas LeWitt’s work shows 
absolute clarity, comprehensibility, and self-containment, Mohr’s 
work is seemingly complex, fluid, and open-ended, as if part of an 
ongoing search. The art idea is ever evolving, the algorithm ever 
changing. Ironically, this indeterminacy and flux became part of 
the postmodern art critic vocabulary; and yet, computer art again 
remained marginalized and without serious critical consideration.
Although the technologists did seem to break with traditional 
categories of painting and sculpture by utilizing the most complex 
media of the time, they did not abandon traditional media in order 
to question its use. In conceptual art, the artist remained central in 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 54
the conception and often production of the material artwork, while 
the computer artist ceded generation and production entirely to an 
electronic machine. The computer artist had gone one step too far 
by creating a further distance between artificer and artifact, which 
threatened to sever the link between art and artist altogether. The 
idea became embodied in a machine, and that machine was crucial 
in the realization and conceptualization of art. Furthermore, one 
could say that the technologists still held the modernist belief in the 
self-contained art object: illustrated in the need to materialize and 
exhibit an artifact. Noll, who was the first to use the computer for 
aesthetic purposes, attempted to mimic modernist aesthetics. Far 
from conceptual art’s anti-aesthetics, computer art never abandoned 
its preoccupation with notions of abstract beauty. Computer art’s 
lack of aesthetics, which critics continually pointed to, was more 
about the limitations of the medium, rather than a will to deconstruct 
the concept of beauty. Like the modernists, Noll was trying to locate 
the boundaries, both aesthetic and epistemological, of computer 
imagery rather than questioning the medium’s production. The 
technologists were concerned with making discoveries not for art, 
but for science, especially the burgeoning computer sciences and its 
expanding subfield of computer graphics.
What becomes discernible in computer art criticism is certain 
anti-computer sentiment. The perception of the computer, which 
had emerged as a compelling symbol, changed in the decade prior 
to the first exhibition. Through an uneasy mass media, as sociologist 
Irene Travis observed in 1970, the “awe-and-wonder” assessment 
that had characterized the public response in the 1950s gave way 
to a more general “anti-computer spirit” in the following decade.85 
What had been a symbol of great hope in the cultural imagination 
became an object of profound fear. This was motivated not only by 
the anxiety that the computer would take the place of the worker, 
which had been dramatized in the 1956 Hollywood movie Desk 
Set, but also by the alarm that the computer could become the 
seamless instrument of governmental control. Through the 1950s, 
the computer became the principal technological metaphor of the 
period reflecting the human mind as no previous machine had. A 
cognitive revolution began to emerge around the theoretical work 
of Alan Turing which precipitated a new conception of the human 
being as a machine. In 1950, Alan Turing posed the question, “Can 
machines think?” in his seminal paper “Computing Machinery 
FUTURE  CRASHES 55
and Intelligence,” published in the journal Mind . Turing wrote 
about the possibility for machine intelligences through a simple 
analogy between the human brain and the electronic computer. 
Turing claimed that by the dawn of the new millennia computing 
machines would be capable of imitating human intelligence 
perfectly. The decade would see the first artificial intelligence 
conference and the extensive use of the “human-as-machine” and 
“computer-as-brain” metaphor in advertising. This process meant a 
steady anthropomorphizing of the computer. Before the computer 
took its current name it was known generally as the “electronic” 
or “mechanical” brain, as it was in Edmund C. Berkeley’s Giant 
Brains or Machines That Think  (1949). As the computer became 
a surrogate for human intelligence and the faculty of memory was 
metaphorically conceded to machine, the computer appeared to 
be a wholly new species of technology. It appeared, as historian 
Theodore Roszak wrote, to flirt with the “mysteries of the mind 
itself.”86
One of the most significant introductions of the computer to mass 
culture was the televised presidential election between Stevenson 
and Eisenhower in November 1952. On live television the famed 
UNIVAC computer was to tabulate and predict results. The three 
reporters, Walter Cronkite, Charles Collingwood, and Art Draper, 
conversed with the machine as if it was a prophet or oracle, even 
though the machine exhibited no human characteristics. Cronkite 
introduced the machine as the “miracle of the modern age, the 
electronic brain.” While Collingwood asked waggishly, “Can you 
say something UNIVAC? Have you got anything to say to the 
television audience?” When it came time to televise the predictions, 
the programmer hesitated, as the result was contradicting the 
current political predictions. Fearing the embarrassment from 
a wayward result, the hierarchy or the computer manufacturer 
ordered the programmer to falsify the results in order for them to 
fall in line with the political experts. Eventually, the Eisenhower 
landslide that the computer had predicted beforehand eventuated, 
which meant an admission from Collingwood and the programmer 
that the computer had been correct all along. The very next day, 
headlines varied from “Machine Makes Monkey Out of Man” to 
“Big Electronic Gadget Proves Smarter Than Men.” Through this 
publicity stunt, the UNIVAC became an overnight sensation and 
grew to be synonymous with computing. “When the news got out,” 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 56
historian Jeffrey Young explains, “the powers of the invincible, 
omniscient, and mysterious computer reached mythical status. 
UNIVAC instantly became a household name.”87
Sociologist R. S. Lee, writing in 1970, noticed that during 
the 1960s there was a “secondary undercurrent of uneasiness” 
that related to the notion that the computer was now capable of 
autonomous cognition.88 The specter of machine intelligence and 
the deeper fear that machines would someday enslave its creators 
began to haunt the public consciousness. Stanley Kubrick’s 1968 film 
adaptation of Arthur C. Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey  is a prime 
example of this fear. In the narrative, the controlling computer on 
Discovery One spaceship, called HAL 9000, malfunctions despite 
its claims to be infallible. The computer endeavors to cover up the 
error by killing the witnesses to its humiliation. A battle between 
man and machine eventuates, which sees the survivor escape HAL’s 
marauding vengeance. The human eventually triumphs by disabling 
the errant computer. Ironically, the first recording of computer-
generated music, Music from Mathematics  (1962), created by 
John R. Pierce and Max Mathews at Bell Labs, contained the song 
“Daisy Bell,” which became the famous last utterance of the film’s 
disobedient and murderous computer.
At the close of the 1960s, the computer had become, as the 
sociologist Irene Taviss suggested, a “symbol for all that is good and 
all that is evil in modern society.”89 The computer’s capacity to engage 
in operations approximate to “human reasoning” had “generated 
much popular agitation—ranging from awe and admiration to fear 
and resentment.”90 In the 1960s, the use of the computer increased. 
Although the computer was not yet ubiquitous in business and 
government, its indirect influence was increasingly felt. The high 
degree of emotional reaction to computers seemed to relate to the 
challenge machines seemed to present to humans. Commentators in 
the mass media often took great delight when a computer made an 
error. No other machine’s failure elicited the same reaction. When 
a computer makes a mistake, Taviss wrote, “man is reassured that 
this machine is as fallible as he is.”91 The public took great interest 
and pride when the world chess champion beat the world’s most 
advanced computer.92 This sentiment is still strong today. The art 
critics covering the Howard Wise exhibition also appeared to take 
pleasure in vilifying the computer for its primitive results, positing 
that human creation was beyond the reach of machines.
FUTURE  CRASHES 57
As the 1960s advanced, the computer as a pervasive mechanism 
replaced the autonomous super-brain myth of the 1950s. The 
computer was now both the corrupter of human minds and the 
mechanism of central government organization. As Frederic 
Withington suggested in his 1969 sociological study, the computer 
symbolized “impersonality, conformity to preestablished patterns, 
reduction to a number, and impossibility of changing the status 
quo.”93 The computer now became an agent of stagnation and 
colossal inertia inherent in modern organization. From this 
perspective, it is not principally a useful tool or an important labor-
saving device, but a machine that imposes its own logic on society. 
The popular image of the computer was an immaculately clean room 
filled with streamlined computational machines and their various 
peripheral devices. Standing dutifully by was a collection of dark-
suited human programmers and operators, often ominously called 
the “priesthood.” In the popular imagination, the priesthood were 
seen to deify the computer as some kind of superhuman instrument, 
which led many to view them as slaves to the new system-based 
order. For many, the computer had no emotions, no personality, and 
therefore no cultural knowledge or adequate frame of reference.
These trends in public consciousness give us some clues to the 
reception of computer art by critics, artists, and the wider public. 
The power of the computer seemed to be accelerating at an 
imperceptible rate. And it appeared that technologists would begin 
to digitize human attributes beyond just mental functions. Human 
creativity appeared to be at risk. Perhaps the best indication of this 
social anxiety comes in the form of the science fiction of the era. A 
number of books were published that dealt with the loss of creativity 
to technological forms.94 In 1958, Dennis Gabor, the Nobel Prize–
winning physicist and inventor of holography, voiced this concern: 
“I sincerely hope that machines will never replace the creative artist, 
but in good conscience, I cannot say that they never could.”95 This 
sentiment of anxiety about the future impact of computing on the 
creative fields was widely felt, even by those in science.
It appears that critics were most concerned about the promises 
technologists were making regarding artificial or mechanized 
creativity. In the first writings on computer art, there was a great 
deal of celebratory bravado over the computer’s potential to usurp 
artistic endeavor. Even before the industrial revolution, people within 
society reacted with trepidation whenever a machine embodied 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 58
those characteristics that were believed to be exclusively human. 
Creativity was a cherished attribute. The artist had been traditionally 
associated with creation first through Ancient mythology and later 
Christian cosmology. As the art historian Rhys Carpenter wrote, 
“The artist’s greatest and most necessary illusion is the illusion he 
is creating. Rob him of that belief and you have shorn him of his 
power.”96 The ideological power of art stems from the mystification 
of the process of making. With a Kantian understanding of genius, 
modernism in the twentieth century recast this mythology by 
building on the belief that art is the only “properly autonomous and 
self-determining mode of production.”97 The computer appeared to 
undermine the ontology of art and efface the identity of the artist by 
reducing him or her to a mere servant of the machine.
The computer appeared to undermine the act of creation, once 
the exclusive domain of humans. Inherent in the computer art 
dream was the redundancy of the artist. This was implicitly put 
forward in the title of the first essays on computer art, for example, 
the co-authored “The Electronic Computer as Artist” (1964) and 
Pierce’s article “Portrait of a Machine as a Young Artist” (1965). 
The Howard Wise exhibition showed that the artist had become 
redundant in the physical production of the work, as Duchamp’s 
Readymades  had done earlier in the century. Stuart Preston, the 
critic for the New York Times , appeared forlorn at the prospect of 
science and technology in control of the future to the point that they 
would allow “any kind of painting to be computer-generated.”98 For 
the technologist, it appeared as a natural progression: increasingly 
efficient generations of automatons, widely employed in other fields, 
would be used in art production. In any case, from the technologists’ 
perspective they were designing machines to extend, multiply, and 
heighten human mental and physical abilities. However, computer 
automation, via the plotter, made the artist’s hand absent and 
craftsmanship irrelevant. While the new machines had expanded the 
capacity of our mind, now the computer, with its superior precision 
and systematized dexterity, replaced the drawing body.
The specter of usurpation informed the reception and criticism 
of early computer art. As computer artworks found their way into 
galleries and museums, the subject of creativity became increasingly 
contested. Noll claimed that science and computing were forcing 
us to “re-examine our preconceptions about creativity and 
machines.”99 He went on to argue that, “if creativity is restricted 
FUTURE  CRASHES 59
to mean the production of the unconventional or the unpredicted, 
then the computer should instead be portrayed as a creative 
medium—an active and creative collaborator with the artist.”100 
While some scientists believed that the computer could handle 
some elements of creativity, there existed considerable skepticism 
among scientists and artists about the claims that were being 
made. In 1966, at a computer conference held at the University 
of Waterloo, two statements were made by technologists that 
trumpeted the prospect of machine creativity, which according 
to Reichardt appeared “unnecessarily boastful and heroic.”101 
According to Reichardt, who epitomized the dominant sentiment 
within the art’s community, the machine did not possess the 
prime forces of creativity—imagination, intuition, and emotion. 
Later, in the 1970s, computing conferences circulated provocative 
press releases, such as “Computers Are Creating Art Which Is 
Indistinguishable From the Man-Made Product,” which ultimately 
raised the ire of the conservative New York Times  art critic John 
Canaday.102
Artists and critics were uneasy with the claim of computer 
creativity. Despite this, the technologists framed their computer art 
research in the “man versus machine” rhetoric that had permeated 
artificial intelligence discourse. Turing’s “Imitation Game,” now 
commonly referred to as the “Turing Test,” objectively tested the 
intelligence of a system, machine or otherwise. In the spirit of post-
war behavioral psychology, the test measured success by the number 
of human subjects fooled by his machine. The first examples of 
computer art worked on the same premise, albeit to simulate or 
actuate human creativity, rather than intelligence. A number of 
technologists employed the simulating power of the computer to 
recreate well-known artworks. The German mathematician and 
computer art pioneer Frieder Nake programmed the statistical laws 
of the early modernist painter Paul Klee. But the technologist who 
did the most to simulate human creativity was A. Michael Noll, 
the famed engineer at Bell Labs.103 Most famous of his trials was 
the Mondrian Experiment, and in many ways this experiment 
symbolically placed the machine’s creative power above that 
of the artist. While the experiment promoted the computer as a 
complement to the artist’s powers, it implicitly framed the machine 
as a future competitor to the artist. Those technologists who 
first theorized the computer art form were quick to associate the 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 60
computer’s capabilities with the human mental faculty of creativity. 
Noll called it a “totally new kind of creative medium.”104
In 1965, Noll produced the computer-generated artwork entitled 
Computer Composition with Lines  (Figure 1.6), which won first 
prize in the Computers and Automation  annual competition. Noll 
stipulated in the periodical that the motivation for the type of pattern 
and design came from Mondrian’s Composition in Line  (1916/17) 
(Figure 1.7). The marks made on the computer-generated picture 
were placed according to a pseudorandom number generator “with 
statistics chosen to approximate the bar density, lengths, and widths 
FIGURE 1.6  A. Michael Noll. Computer Composition with Lines , 
1965. IBM 7094, general dynamics SC-4020 microfilm plotter. © 1965 
A. Michael Noll.

FUTURE  CRASHES 61
in the Mondrian painting.”105 Because the computer had simulated 
Mondrian’s schema so successfully, Noll felt an experiment, 
contrasting and comparing the two, could reveal some interesting 
findings.
The experiment, an approximation of Turing’s original 
experiment of 1950, existed somewhere between applied visual 
psychology and experimental aesthetics and would be the first of 
many completed by scientists and technologists in the 1960s. Noll’s 
test involved taking xerographic copies of the two artworks and 
presenting them to 100 subjects who worked at Bell Labs. The 
sample taken was representative of a scientific research laboratory, 
although the subjects had wide-ranging educational backgrounds. 
The questioner asked which picture they preferred and which FIGURE 1.7  Piet Mondrian, Composition in Line,  1916/17. © 2013 
Mondrian/Holtzman Trust c/o HCR International USA.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 62
picture they thought Mondrian had produced.106 The results showed 
that 59 percent of the subjects preferred the computer-generated 
artwork and only 28 percent were able to identify correctly the 
picture produced by Mondrian.107 As Noll recorded, the subjects 
described the computer-generated picture as being “neater” and 
more “varied,” “imaginative,” “soothing,” and “abstract” than the 
Mondrian.108 Noll concluded that in general these “people seemed 
to associate the randomness of the computer-generated picture 
with human creativity whereas the orderly bar placement of the 
Mondrian painting seemed to them machinelike.”109
The psychological experiment was widely publicized in art 
and science journals and remains a key anecdote in the history of 
computer art. The art historian Meyer Schapiro was among those 
interested by Noll’s results. Schapiro was interested in how Noll’s 
simulations gave insight into the random element within Mondrian’s 
compositions.110
Noll recognized the inherent weaknesses with such a subjective 
experiment. The reduction in size of the Mondrian to a xerographic 
reproduction would undoubtedly degrade the aesthetic quality. 
Also noted was the fact that a larger proportion of the subjects 
with technical training would identify the computer picture because 
of their fluency with computers. As Noll admitted, if artists and 
subjects from a nontechnical environment had been similarly tested, 
the “result might have been different.”111 Furthermore, as Noll 
declared, Mondrian apparently placed the vertical and horizontal 
strokes in a deliberate and orderly manner. Essentially, the test was 
an aesthetic exercise to establish which pattern was preferred—an 
arbitrary task where the subjects selected between randomness 
and order. Yet, although Noll was careful not to detract from 
Mondrian’s artistic abilities, he did seem to boast that the computer 
had somehow usurped the role of the great Dutch artist, who was 
one of the “most influential masters of painting.”112
Noll’s experiment, and the ensuing interest, was a result of 
it being framed within the machine versus man paradigm. Noll 
continually stated that the programmer-artist working with the 
computer produced a pattern that was preferable “over the pattern 
of one of Mondrian’s paintings.”113 The second question asked the 
subject to identify the pattern most likely produced by the human 
hand of the artist. Noll must have suspected that the subjects would 
choose the more ordered pattern due to the common association 
FUTURE  CRASHES 63
between precision and machine production. While Noll pursued 
randomness, it must be said that the modernist artist, beyond 
wanting to create certain emotive connotations, sought to create 
order as a way to elicit a feeling of perfect equilibrium. Although 
Noll said that the “experiment was designed solely to compare 
two patterns that differed in elements of order and randomness,” 
the questions asked revealed that the pattern generated by the 
computer was in fact more humanlike due to the random nature of 
the marks.114 What the test intended to illustrate was that although 
both patterns were conceived by humans, the central feature of the 
computer-generated picture, which was decided by a programmed 
random algorithm, simulated human creativeness successfully. 
The computer could feign creativity and feign it with such skill 
that one could come to admire the humanness of the machine-
positioned lines.
In 1959, C. P. Snow stated that he felt it was “bizarre” that 
so “very little of twentieth-century science has been assimilated 
into twentieth-century art.”115 In a matter of five years, however, 
an art form emerged that incorporated the most advanced 
instrumentation and theoretical practice of twentieth-century 
science and technology. In doing so, science proclaimed its intention 
to take the technological power of the post-industrial age into a 
world traditionally resistant to such progressivism. The advent of 
computer art illustrates the shifting ground between the scientist 
and artist. In 1956, György Kepes lamented that “the artist and 
the scientist are almost never the same person.”116 In the 1960s, at 
the height of the Two Cultures  debate, technologists attempted to 
blur the boundaries either in the name of conciliation or, as Franke 
suggested, for the “sheer pleasure” of manipulating “structures in 
conformity with aesthetic notions.”117 Visual creativity and aesthetic 
objects were no longer the artist’s exclusive domain. Comfortable 
in taking the title, even when their main source of income derived 
from science work, the scientist and technologist redefined the 
definition of artist. In many ways, Rockman and Mezei were 
correct in asserting that technologists were the avant-garde of 
digital forms of art. A. Michael Noll and a host of other engineers 
at Bell Labs (such as Kenneth Knowlton and Leon Harmon) were 
prolifically inventive, exhibiting a creativity once only reserved for 
artists. Receiving considerable attention, their images would be 
exhibited internationally. Of course, traditionalists resented this. 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 64
In many ways, however, this was not a deliberate attempt by the 
scientists to affront the artists, though the scientists’ boasting was 
seen as insensitive, often it was just a matter of celebrating the 
seemingly limitless possibility of the computer or taking advantage 
of the expanding nature of the visual arts. In addition, if technology 
had steadily reduced the need for specialized skill in a variety of 
industries, it was only logical that it would reduce the physical skill 
required in art. The scientist felt that the computer could offer real 
knowledge and extend the artist’s powers in new and exciting ways.
Nevertheless, artist and humanist critics reacted by either 
ignoring the phenomenon or dogmatically criticizing it on an 
aesthetic level. They simply countered the technologists’ claims by 
pointing out the fact that computer art was aesthetically simplistic, 
banal, and unoriginal, even when this was proved not to be the case. 
These criticisms did not deter the technologists from advancing the 
computer art project. The technologists were not satisfied simply 
to successfully invent a machine that autonomously produced 
drawings after a few simple instructions or trumping humanly 
produced works of art by presenting visual art simulacra; they were 
increasingly excited about the prospect of submitting art to the 
combined power of mathematics and computing.
The next chapter, “Coded Aesthetics,” demonstrates how 
thoroughly science shaped computer art in the 1960s and how, 
for the first time, it developed a machine that could assist in the 
empirical study of art. Here was an instrument that could expose, in 
mathematical terms, the structure of art and the nature of aesthetics. 
The new “experimental aesthetics,” as it became known, resulted in 
a scientific analysis of the statistical properties of artistic material. 
The abstracting power of mathematics coupled with the latest 
technoscience discourses represented a new and powerful tool to 
probe the primordial secrets of art. The technologist could vanquish 
the mysteries of art. While the computer had challenged the position 
of the artist, abstract science threatened to lay bare the very nature 
of art. For the humanist artist and critic, this mathematization of 
art was dangerously reductive and potentially dehumanizing.
Because mathematics permeates every layer of its abstract and 
material form, the computer shares a privileged relationship 
with it. In fact, so intrinsic is mathematics to the computer that 
computer art is arguably the most mathematically imbued art form 
in the history of art. While other art forms throughout history 
have shared a functional and spiritual relationship to mathematics, 
computer art’s bond is all-inclusive. Admittedly, there have been 
periods where the interrelationship of mathematics and art has 
been high. The Renaissance’s mathematization of pictorial space is 
perhaps the most commonly theorized. In the twentieth century, 
op art, conceptual art, and geometric abstraction have been 
mathematically oriented. The Russian avant-garde was especially 
influenced by discoveries in multidimensional mathematics. As 
opposed to op art, which does not directly produce images with 
the aid of mathematical formulas or apparatus, computer art, 
which is produced by different sorts of empirical calculation, has 
a mathematical basis. The art produced conforms to the canons 
of mathematics and logic; it needs to be completed, consistent, 
and adhere to the stringent conditions of computability. Although 
not linked to pure mathematics, the art form is best defined as the 
building up of patterns from ever-changing relations, rhythms, and 
proportions of abstract geometric form. Computer art simulates the 
real by mathematically modeling it, rather than imitating it through 
a copying process based on human perception.
In the past, commentators have been quick to link computer 
art’s aesthetic to early forms of modernist abstraction, such as CHAPTER TWO
Coded aesthetics
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 66
constructivism. Although these movements are undoubtedly 
influential, the connection is often overemphasized, especially 
when one considers the more applicable and relevant trends 
within twentieth-century science. To locate computer art’s aesthetic 
foundation, one needs to look beyond the aesthetic tradition of 
early modernism to the deep reveries within the mathematical 
consciousness of Western science. That elemental wonder of nature’s 
structure and patterns, which is quintessential to the abstract and 
life sciences, provides the first aesthetic impulse for computer art. 
Moreover, the heritage of computer art is firmly rooted in the 
analog mechanical instruments and drawing machines that were 
utilized to measure and map natural phenomena. The very claim 
that computer-generated images could be defined as art has its roots 
in the popularity of scientific visualization.
The development of twentieth-century electronic technology 
encouraged a new responsiveness to beauty in nature. Following 
World War II, a “new landscape,” as György Kepes described it, 
emerged out of modern science and technology. It provided for 
the first time totally new sensations from magnified electronic 
images, expanding our sensory experiences of time and space, and 
thus altering human perception forever.1 With new mechanical 
instruments, researchers could describe nature in precise 
mathematical terms by mapping the complex orders and disorders 
of natural phenomena, whether visible or not. Science was becoming 
increasingly visual. During this period, there was a renewed 
appreciation of the aesthetical nature of visual data collected 
through the course of scientific experimentation. Historically, 
scientists have placed great aesthetic value on those images derived 
from nature, botanical and anatomical drawing being the most 
common. In the nineteenth century, however, there was a surge 
of interest in visualizing abstract language. This period witnessed 
mathematicians progressively composing pictures to visualize and 
understand geometric forms. The art historian and critic James 
Elkins called these images of science, which had been neglected by 
art history but were semantically rich in information, “nonart.”2 As 
will be shown by its history, computer art successfully made that 
transition from “nonart” to “art” through a series of precedents 
that saw scientists developing a growing aesthetic sensibility.
During the twentieth century, a small number of scientists 
viewed the products of their scientific pursuits as aesthetic forms. 
CODED  AESTHETICS 67
Following the lead of others, such as the nineteenth-century 
German chemists Wilhelm Oswald and Ferdinand Runge, scientists 
such as Adolf Portmann and Horst Reumuth regarded the visual 
material produced through scientific processes as aesthetic objects. 
The nineteenth-century biologist Ernst Haeckel, also providing 
precedent, believed that there was significant value in celebrating 
the art forms of nature. Early in the new century, the German art 
critic and historian Franz Roh began to posit scientific imagery 
as art. In his landmark book Photo-Eye , first published in 1929, 
Roh exhibited images by nonprofessional photographers, which 
included photographs of medical diagnostics, astronomy, aerial 
imagery, and natural objects. The author stipulated the importance 
of these “outsiders” in gathering images of nature from various 
realms of scientific research and bringing their aesthetic qualities to 
light.3 For Roh, the worth of photography existed in the “aesthetic 
value of nature itself,” not the personal expression of the artist.4 
This shift in perceptions of what constitutes an aesthetic object 
underpinned the view that computer images had claims to being 
art, which eventually led to military and commercial laboratories 
entering the products of their research into computer art contests.
Laying the foundations for computer art’s aesthetic claims, the 
American mathematician and artist Ben Laposky made the first 
systematic attempt to dissolve the boundary between art and science 
objects. In the early 1950s, Laposky photographed thousands of 
elegant analogue waveforms from a cathode ray oscilloscope he 
had modified (Figure 2.1). Laposky called his creations Electronic 
Abstractions  or Oscillons . For Herbert W. Franke, Laposky’s work 
was the first major initiative into graphic generation by way of 
electronic and computational machines. Consequently, those who 
have written on computer art have placed Laposky in the unique 
position of being the first computer artist. However, positioning 
Laposky as the first computer artist because of the technological 
precedent he set is problematic. The title does appear anachronistic. 
“Computer art,” as a term, entered circulation a decade after 
Laposky’s exhibition. While the term “computer” became part of 
public vocabulary in the early 1950s, computers are not mentioned 
in Laposky’s original catalog. Rather, Laposky understood his 
practice through the paradigm of electronics, not computers. 
Furthermore, in the 1970s, Laposky would associate his work more 
closely with kinetic and op art rather than computer art. Beyond 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 68
demonstrating the relationship between science and art, Laposky’s 
electronic compositions were meant to reveal the potential of this 
new technique for design.
Although there are certain problems in retrospectively claiming 
Laposky’s work as the first example of computer art, one cannot 
ignore the importance of the mathematician as an antecedent and 
as a link between analog and digital devices. Like early computer 
artists, Laposky redirected a utilitarian device from the domain of 
science—electrical engineering in Laposky’s case—to art. Because FIGURE 2.1  Ben Laposky, Oscillons  34, 26, 14, 47, 1953. Courtesy of 
Sanford Museum and Planetarium, Cherokee, Iowa.

CODED  AESTHETICS 69
Laposky’s art was cross-disciplinary, there was significant interest 
in the art form, which resulted in regional and international 
exhibitions. Incredibly, Laposky exhibited 188 times. The work was 
shown in more than 100 cities in 37 U.S. states and 16 countries. 
This international popularity mirrored computer art’s initial 
interdisciplinary success and illustrates the widespread interest 
in experimental technologies that occurred outside the bounds of 
mainstream art.
What many commentators overlook in Laposky’s practice, 
which is present in the computer art tradition, is the enduring 
desire to invoke the pattern and form of nature. In Laposky’s case, 
he makes unseen natural phenomena both visible and tangible as 
an art form. These images become the visual manifestations of 
the basic invisible aspects of nature—the movement of electrons 
and energy fields. The oscilloscope, which can measure all kinds 
of phenomena, reconstructs waveform or measures voltage waves. 
Sensors convert these natural forces into electric signals that can be 
observed and studied. This utilitarian measuring device became a 
means of capturing nature’s underlying and concealed forms and 
patterns. It is similar to the photograph in many ways, especially 
in its mechanical ability to allow nature to register its own image. 
Recalling the pioneer photographer William Henry Fox Talbot’s 
metaphor in The Pencil of Nature  (1844), Laposky writes, “The 
electronic beam within the cathode ray tube is actually the pencil or 
brush by which these traces are formed.”5
The important visual characteristic which surfaced in preceding 
computer art was Laposky’s curvilinear patterns. Within the 
abstract and natural sciences, the complex sine wave or Lissajous 
figure had become renowned for its aesthetic aura. This popular 
visual pattern was named after the nineteenth-century French 
physicist Jules Lissajous, who developed an optical method for 
studying vibrations. The physicist had created translucent images 
on a screen from the reflected vibrations of a tuning fork. There was 
a long history in physics in generating complex curvilinear designs 
from mechanical pendulums. Mechanical pendulums and electronic 
systems allowed the figure to be translated mathematically, allowing 
for the improved study of symmetrical and asymmetrical motion 
and force.
Laposky’s Oscillons  originated from a search for different 
mathematical forms. In the late 1930s, Laposky attempted to find 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 70
a mathematical source for nonfigurative art through mathematical 
magic number squares. Laposky was also influenced by the serial 
rhythms developed by the mathematician, artist, and theorist Joseph 
Schillinger. Influential amongst computer artists, Schillinger’s The 
Mathematical Basis of the Arts  (1948) formalized the concept 
that a machine could generate art, once it had been codified into 
mathematical language. In the twentieth century, the Lissajous 
figure became popular as a schema for design, effectively making a 
shift from the purely scientific to the cultural. Many experimented 
with harmonograph tracing machines, pendulum pattern 
makers, and other analog devices. Since 1951, Ivan Moscovich 
experimented with different mechanisms for drawing mathematical 
curves and Lissajous figures. The aesthetic curvilinear effects 
produced by analog drawing machines and electronic oscilloscopes 
parallel early computer art. In fact, analog-mechanical works were 
shown alongside computer art in Cybernetic Serendipity . Because 
mathematically conceived figuration was easily mechanized, 
mathematical schemas such as sine curves were a simple way of 
producing visually complex results.
Some of the most admired computer art completed in the 1960s 
contained the harmonious mathematical properties of the Lissajous 
figure. In the United States, curvilinear designs dominated. The 
application of parametric equations to produce a complex 
Lissajous figure can be located in Plexus , a work by Kerry Strand 
and Larry Jenkins (Figure 2.2), both engineers who worked for 
Calcomp (California Computer Products, Inc.), the leading plotter 
manufacturer.6 Maughan S. Mason, a technologist working for 
IBM, had previously found inspiration in pendulum motion and 
produced Christmas Wreath—Computer Style  (Figure 2.3) by 
transforming linear configuration through a recursive mathematical 
function. Rare amongst early computer artists, he signed his work.
A description of the mathematical schemata was paramount to 
computer art’s success. Indeed, the critic John Canaday, reviewing a 
computer art exhibition in 1970, believed that computer art, which 
for him carried banal titles that described what the abstraction echoed 
in the natural world, should carry the mathematical equations from 
which the works were generated.7 In the early years of Computers 
and Automation ’s coverage, the descriptions of mathematical 
equations were included in the publication, along with the 
computer and plotter model used. This demonstrates the scientific 
CODED  AESTHETICS 71
imperatives of the venture and the importance of mathematics in the 
appreciation of computer art. Much of the work was dominated by 
geometric patterns and figures generated by iterative and recursive 
procedures. There was a prevalence of moiré patterns or effects; 
however, unlike the op artists, the computer artists superimposed 
geometric patterns or shapes in a slightly different alignment until FIGURE 2.2  Kerry Strand and Larry Jenkins, Plexus , 1968. Color coor -
dination and plotting techniques by Gary Craigmile. Courtesy of Kerry 
Strand.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 72
an abstract figure appeared. Repeating a basic Platonic shape and 
slightly altering the dimensions incrementally could generate a 
strange organic shape. The spatial form thus generated mirrored the 
accretionary growth of shells and horns. D’Arcy Thompson, who 
gave mathematical descriptions to a myriad of organic forms in his 
famous work Growth and Form  (1917), influenced many scientists 
and computer artists.
For the early computer artists, simple iterative mathematical 
procedures seemed to echo the structures and forms of nature. 
Symmetry, which is an invariable characteristic of growth in 
living and nonliving systems, was easily amenable to algorithmic FIGURE 2.3  Maughan S. Mason, Christmas Wreath—Computer Style,  
1968. Courtesy Maughan S. Mason family. All rights reserved.

CODED  AESTHETICS 73
procedures. The interest in complicated spiral geometry, which has 
a long history in Western science and art, again finds expression 
in computer art. Kerry Strand’s The Snail  (Figure 2.4) generates 
a biomorphic figure by having an elliptical shape recur. In John 
Canaday’s review, he singles out The Snail  for analysis. After 
lambasting the engineer for the simple-minded title, he states that 
the “diagram”—deliberately distinguishing it as science rather than 
art—possessed a striking complexity and mathematical purity that 
only the computer, with its mechanical precision, could obtain. 
Indeed, while many dismissed computer art as overly simplistic, 
mere artless line drawings, many of the early examples were 
FIGURE 2.4  Kerry Strand, The Snail,  1968. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 74
executed with the highest visual complexity, producing subtle linear 
effects unattainable by the human hand.
With the development of the plotter, these mathematic-inspired 
visualizations seemed to exhibit great visual power, far in excess 
of the linkages and templates of the traditional drafting room. 
The plotter, coupled with the computer, gave an extreme form of 
exactitude and precision that exceeded any handmade craft. With 
the automatism of the machine and the programmatic powers of 
mathematics, the figures appeared to emerge from some inexplicable 
abstract world, something that mildly interested Canaday in his 
review. Because of the computer’s ability to produce unexpected 
results from highly complex and stochastic programs, many 
computer artists complained that they failed to recognize their own 
output, which gave the machine a mysterious and transcendental 
quality. The moment would arise when the artist-programmer no 
longer retained a precise understanding of their own algorithm. 
This meant that there was always a dislocation from the final 
output—hence the technologist would name the work after what 
it resembled in the natural world. This was especially the case in 
the 1960s when the program was installed by punch card. The final 
image was visible only when it was plotted in the final stage of 
production. Many of the technologists talked of the excitement 
when the program took on a life of its own as the image emerged 
ex nihilo . They continually talked about the thrill of finding or 
discovering unsuspected possibilities. Says Manfred Mohr:
Even though my work process is rational and systematic, its 
results can be unpredictable. Like a journey, only the starting 
point and a hypothetical destination [are] known. What happens 
during the journey is often unexpected and surprising.8
The abstract world of mathematics combined with the autonomous 
nature of the machine distanced the practitioners increasingly from 
their art. In instances where graphics are used to visualize something 
without direct reference to the external world—such as an abstract 
system of pure mathematics—imagery tended to gain the status of 
a real, tangible object.
Computer-generated images were not mere expressions of abstract 
theoretical descriptions, but were visual analogs of an algorithmic 
event, an idea that was lost on critics such as Canaday. This 
CODED  AESTHETICS 75
animated existence invested the image with an élan vital . Laposky 
initiated this conceptual transition by viewing electronic waveforms 
as art object rather than as scientific representation. As entities or 
real objects, they are no longer empirical data, rather formations 
that have their own phenomenological presence and identity. The 
electronic analog display allows for direct real-time manipulation 
of composition and form. The forms are viewed as visual analogs of 
natural events—kinematic entities that are somehow natural in their 
analogous relationships, and yet wholly synthetic as mechanized 
visualizations. The Oscillons  appear delicate and too meticulous to 
have been executed by the human hand. Yet they do not appear 
mechanistic either and lack the perfect regularity or symmetry that 
we associate with geometric visualization. In reality, the image shows 
no suggestion of craftsmanship, no bush marks, and no straight 
lines. As a machine, the electronic oscilloscope is overtly organic 
from the pulsing electrons emitted from the anode to the phosphor 
on the screen that fluoresces. The images are viewed in terms of 
their phenomenological effect of light and pattern. Although they 
are synthetic, they appear to occur naturally—as if the forms have 
been summoned by human agency, but not created by it. From 
the very beginning, Laposky noticed that many of the Oscillons  
have an “almost sculptural quality” within the highly contrasted, 
nonilluminated background of an oscilloscope screen.9 Likewise, 
Laposky described figures as “images of luminescent … moving 
masses suspended in space.”10 The mythic space of the computer 
becomes important to the computer art of the 1980s, and later to 
new media art in the 1990s as virtuality is conceptualized. Indeed, 
The Snail  and other curvilinear figures completed by technologists 
became precursors to the later 1980s computer art of William 
Latham and others who abstracted nature’s morphogenetic process 
and created strange biomorphic forms (see Chapter 5).
Like those Platonists who view scientific explanation akin to 
mathematical proof—as something one discovers rather than 
invents—many of the computer artists viewed their figures as objects 
discovered rather than human constructs. Mathematical Platonism 
proclaims the belief in an archaic reality, a mathematical realm 
that exists independently of the human mind. Philip J. Davis and 
Reuben Hersh suggest that if you are a Platonist in mathematics, 
you see yourself more as an “empirical scientist like a geologist, you 
do not invent anything, because it is all there already. All he can do 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 76
is discover.”11 The naming of the work after what it corresponded 
to in the natural world, the most common practice of scientists and 
technologists in the early years, also indicates the tendency for this 
type of Platonic objectification. As Roman Verostko, one of the 
celebrated computer artists of the late 1980s, wrote:
None of the works are made with intentional representation in 
mind. Rather, each work presents one more adventure into a 
world of forms that have never been seen before. This art does not 
re-present some sort of subject or object. Just as a botanist might 
label a newly discovered flower so also I label this or that newly 
made form or series of forms. Titles are therefore arbitrary and 
often derived from evocative qualities associated with the work.12
As covered in later chapters, the Platonic tradition of discovering 
form within the unseen and untouched realm of abstraction is a 
key mythology within computer art, and critics failed to recognize 
this new conceptualization of the art object. The surprise of an 
unexpected form springing into life permeates the writings of 
computer artists. For most, the forms seemed to emerge mysteriously 
and emanate from some extraneous source hidden in the depths 
of the machine. Such artists were unable to locate the source of 
this form and were equally mystified when they saw themselves as 
having contributed nothing consciously toward it. Consequently, 
the form was imbued with a strength and irrefragability that belies 
the form’s fully conscious beginnings.
The admiration of complex pattern and symmetry has a long 
tradition in both Western and Middle Eastern art. The first person to 
qualify the mathematical origins of visual and structural pattern—
the Ancient Greek philosopher Pythagoras—believed the world was 
beautiful because there was a certain measure, proportion, order, 
and harmony between all elements. Computer art’s complex order 
structures have been consistently compared to classical music, and 
the exemplar of Pythagorean tradition—geometrical pattern—is 
the main feature of 1960s computer art. Computer artworks were 
frequently based on the golden section, Fibonacci numbers, and 
many other emblematic Pythagorean premises. Generally, however, 
the early technologists were interested in producing complex, 
aesthetically pleasing figures through simple mathematical functions 
and parameters rather than mathematical equations per se. The 
CODED  AESTHETICS 77
scientists and technologists explored ideas that they were familiar 
with, such as spatial arrangement, periodicities, combinatorics, 
transformations, and symmetry. They enjoyed the simplicity, 
intricacy, and purity of the geometric form that they were able to 
produce. The work Verifying Star  (Figure 2.5), which is a Platonic 
shape repeated or superimposed to produce a self-contained 
geometric figure, was admired for the visual effect of its geometry 
and how it captured the often invisible, inner beauty of nature.
More so than the American technologists, the mathematicians in 
Europe were committed to the theorizing power of mathematics, 
in particular the mathematical-logical formalism developed early 
in the century. The mathematicians were influenced in varying 
degrees by logical positivists: the school of philosophy that emerged 
in central Europe between the two world wars. Logical positivism 
FIGURE 2.5  Donald K. Robbins, Verifying Star,  1967. Courtesy of Sandia 
National Laboratories.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 78
originated from the early work of philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein 
and was developed by Alfred Ayer and others. Searching for 
truth in the foundations of language, logical positivism gave rise 
to the development of linguistic theory by Noam Chomsky and 
influenced the emergence of computational theory. It attempted 
to develop a philosophy of science by combining the resources 
of modern mathematical logic with the empiricist epistemology 
of natural sciences. This school of thought, with its research into 
formal systems, played a significant role in the theory of artificial 
intelligence. As logical empiricists, the mathematicians were 
interested in the power of the computer as an experimental tool. 
Like the American technologists, the Europeans employed the 
computer to transform complex mathematical information into 
visual phenomena. Indeed, much of the pioneering work visualized 
and recorded complex mathematical relations. Visualizing 
mathematical behavior would provide a new kind of analysis for 
approaching mathematical problems: the branch became known as 
“visual mathematics.” Scientists felt that the visual faculty surpassed 
all other senses in its capacity to discover complex relationships. 
In Frieder Nake’s Matrix Multiplication Series 31  (Figure 2.6), 
for example, symbolic schemata were used in the production of 
an aesthetic visualization. This work visualizes the mathematical 
behavior and principles of a number series. For Franke, these 
methods of picture production break with the traditional process 
of building an image from visual structures, because the input data 
is merely computing operands.
In contrast to the figurative work in the United States and Japan, 
the Western Europeans were committed to visual abstraction. 
They—most notably Franke—tended to situate the inclination 
toward abstraction within the rediscovery of constructivism. 
In 1971, Reichardt felt that computer art was the last stance of 
abstract art after modernism’s initial movement toward the abstract 
early in the century. Future commentators of computer art would 
continually draw on the constructivist legacy. Many computer 
artists saw themselves as neo-constructivists, and commentators 
continually noted the influence of the early European vanguard 
movements of constructivism, de Stijl, and Bauhaus. In fact, a 
majority of artists made the connection between their practice and 
early European abstraction. For Dietrich, computer artists were a 
generation who rediscovered constructivism after World War II. 
CODED  AESTHETICS 79
For Franke, “constructivist tendencies” permeated computer art in 
its “rejection of the personal element,” its “crystal-clear, objective 
presentation,” and its “maximum precision.”13 The visual elements 
such as lines and planes, which constituted the visual aesthetic of 
constructivism, were easily amenable to computation. As Dietrich 
suggests, computer artists arranged “form and color logically 
and voluntarily restricted themselves to a few well-defined image 
elements.”14 The constructivist machine aesthetic is evident in 
Auro Lecci’s computer-generated artwork Slant One  (Figure 2.7), 
which is a basic geometric pattern characterized by qualities of 
exactitude, impersonality, and a clear formal order. Though the 
lines were generated by random numbers, its overall aesthetic is 
constructivist in form and sensitivity.FIGURE 2.6  Frieder Nake, Matrix Multiplication Series 31  (part), 1967. 
China ink on paper. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 80
The new computer artists also shared with the constructivists 
the utilitarian doctrine for extending the formal language of 
abstract art into practical design. The modernist schools of 
criticism, such as constructivism, Bauhaus, and the de Stijl Group, 
analyzed compositions in terms of design elements and principles. 
These formal and reductive methodologies were reexamined by 
mathematicians working with the computer. Corresponding to 
the age of efficient industrialization, these modernist groups also FIGURE 2.7  Auro Lecci, Slant One,  1969. Computer-generated artwork 
at the IBM Center at the University of Pisa. Courtesy of the artist.

CODED  AESTHETICS 81
were interested in producing art mechanically as a way to increase 
functionality and avoid embellishment and artistic idiosyncrasies. 
Like the Bauhaus artists, the early computer artist gave importance 
to utility and technological production over l’art pour l’art .
However, in the rush to proclaim constructivism as a key 
antecedent of computer art, a number of dissimilarities have been 
often overlooked. As theorist and historian Nicholas Lambert rightly 
points out, computer art was “heavily constrained by the available 
graphics technology”; the simple lines and abstract shapes were not 
a “self-imposed artistic limitation,” but represented a “boundary to 
image structure.”15 Conveniently, it could be argued that technology 
imposed a limiting logic and unity on computer art that happened 
to correspond to constructivist sensibilities. However, computer 
art’s heritage mirrored some of the programmatic concerns of 
constructivism. While computer art shared similarities in utility, 
technique, and aesthetics, it is more difficult to locate computer art 
in the social-historical dimension of abstract modernism. Moreover, 
the computer art movement fostered a mythology that was quite 
divergent from the utopianism of early abstraction.
One must remember that the New Tendency groups of Europe 
and South America claimed a constructivist heritage. They were, 
however, far closer to the visions of constructivism than computer 
art. Like the constructivists, who believed that industrial technology 
could shape a new world, the New Tendency groups were convinced 
that their new research could also be associated with a new vision 
for life. Resembling the historical avant-garde movements of the 
early modernist period, the New Tendency proposed a comparable 
myth that a new technically augmented society needed to 
materialize. The computer artists, at least in America, did not share 
the constructivists’ ideological and aesthetical convictions; instead, 
they were directly engaged in the abstract scientific philosophies 
of the era. Computer art shared an innate relationship with the 
abstract sciences. While constructivists employed rudimentary 
mathematical relations, the computer artist engaged in higher-
order mathematics, an aspiration that brought them in line 
with the experimental research agenda of computer science. 
In addition, the technologists of North America did not always 
share the constructivist tendencies of their European counterparts. 
Computer art was not homogenous. Figuration, at certain moments, 
dominated the work of the American technologists, which did 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 82
not correspond to the constructivist pictorial tradition of pure 
abstraction. Furthermore, the focus on mechanical automatism, 
pseudo randomness, mathematical visualization, and coded 
aesthetics gave computer art its own unique methodologies. What 
becomes apparent is that commentators followed the modernist 
convention of historicizing new artistic trends by showing how 
they had evolved from past forms. Computer art, which at the 
time was an incommensurable object, was given legitimacy 
through its connections to the modernist movement and was thus 
authenticated within the history of art. In the future, conceptual 
art and the history of photography would also be employed to 
legitimize the claims of computer art.
Although mathematics provided the premise for the technologists’ 
aesthetic creations in North America, offering a way to break down, 
as Charles Csuri believed, the artistic bias, the Europeans, especially 
West Germans, perceived mathematics as a far more powerful tool. 
Upheld as the only way for a field of study to attain the rank of 
a science, mathematics became for them a means to lift art to the 
level of science. The greatest exponent of this view was Franke, who 
believed that the computer could demystify art through abstract 
mathematical methods:
The demystification of art is one of the most far-reaching effects 
of the use of computers in the arts. No sooner is it recognized 
that the creation of art can be formalized, programmed and 
subjected to mathematical treatment, than all those secrets that 
used to enshroud art vanish.16
For Franke, computer art would become another milestone in the 
“evolution toward the mathematization of art.”17 The desire to 
effectively purge art of its taint of rhetoric and mystery through 
abstract science was a weighty assertion, an incursion the art world 
would naturally resist.
For Franke, this mystery had made art a “substitute for faith,” which 
falsely positioned art beyond the bounds of science.18 Discovering 
the riddle of art or describing art scientifically represented the first 
impulses of many technologists. In the United States, Noll’s Mondrian 
Experiment had begun to question the belief that creativity is “the 
personal and somewhat mysterious domain of man.”19 By placing 
art under the scrutiny of empirical method, the computer was the 
CODED  AESTHETICS 83
first instrument with the power to reveal these qualities. The West 
Germans desired a project that established a set of abstract references, 
elements, and principles of design in order to describe and analyze 
artworks. As an empiricist school of criticism, it attempted to make 
aesthetic and artistic analysis in a scientific manner. Its methods were 
those of science, such as modes of observation, analysis, proposal, 
and testing hypotheses. Like the formal systems before them, they 
described artworks by reducing them to their essential elements, 
analyzing the relations among these elements, and interpreting and 
judging them on these descriptions. Like the formalist and empiricist 
criticism, the system claimed to be universally applicable to art, 
devoid of subjective interpretation and value-free.
For the West German mathematicians, it was immediately 
recognized that to interpolate the machine in the artistic process 
opened essential questions regarding the creative act as the genesis 
for a work of art and the possibility of objective evaluation of the 
artwork without human involvement. The technologists felt that the 
fundamental problems of art, whether aesthetic or structural, were 
technical in nature. Furthermore, like many thinkers before them, 
they believed beauty was in essence a mathematical phenomenon 
that could, as Franke suggested, come under the “province of an 
exact science of art.”20
In 1948, Joseph Schillinger, the famed music theorist and 
composer, had anticipated a time when machines might be 
“constructed for the automatic production, reproduction, and 
variation of works of art.”21 Importantly, these machines, called 
the artomaton , could automatically analyze and test the aesthetic 
quality of works of art. Around the same period, other influential 
discourses such as cybernetics and information theory were taking 
shape. Soon, scientists felt there was no limit to the descriptive and 
explicatory powers of the computer.
Like the Europeans, the Japanese believed that the computer had 
the potential to vanquish the mystery of art. The Japanese artist 
Hiroshi Kawano thought scientists, with the aid of the computer, 
had the ability to formulate the “algorithm of art.”22 Like Franke, 
Kawano believed that the computer, combined with the new sciences 
of cybernetics and information theory, would eventually reveal the 
underlying logic of art. Thus, for Kawano, the computer artist should 
be a “scientist of art” searching for its hidden rules.23 Franke felt 
that once the “laws of aesthetics have been ascertained statistically” 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 84
they could be “embodied” in computer programs.24 Likewise, once 
art was deciphered, Kawano believed that the programmer could 
codify the artistic process and then “teach” it to the computer.25 
Therefore, Kawano felt that the computer artist never produced 
the work of art; rather the computer, programmed with “artificial 
creativity,” produced an entity he called the “art computer.”26 For 
Kawano the “art computer,” which was an “experimental product 
of scientific aesthetics,” located the computer in the artist’s former 
place: at the center of artistic generation.27 The autonomous 
computer then would have the power to judge its own aesthetic 
qualities, totally divorced from human sentiment and tradition.
The will to discover the structure of art through formalized 
and abstract systems corresponded to the intellectual sensibility of 
the era. As Robert E. Mueller described, McLuhan believed that 
the “dismembering of language, which scientists are doing for the 
purpose of putting ideas into the retrieval system of computers, may 
have a salutary effect on art and science by giving us a new look at 
the inner roots of ideas we thought were indestructible.”28 Computer 
technologists felt that they could elucidate the patterns and structure 
of art, as others had done within the natural science disciplines. 
The technologists believed that there was a connectedness between 
each sphere of art: in its reception, art making, and evaluation. 
Exploring the connectivity and circuitry of the human experience, 
within the natural and artificial environment, was the broad project 
of cybernetics.
Cybernetics and information theory, both emerging from 
the post-war climate, were two highly influential discourses in 
computer art, but being mostly an esoteric technoscience concept, 
it was alien to mainstream art. Calling on many of the discoveries 
made by Claude Shannon in information theory, the American 
mathematician Norbert Wiener proposed a general theory of science 
that incorporated the control and communications in animal and 
machine.29 The first scientist to bring about this new logical formation 
of information was Shannon, who wrote the first mathematical 
theory of communication. While Shannon concentrated mainly on 
applications of information theory to communication engineering, 
psychologists Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts developed 
mathematical models of the nervous system and effectively applied 
informational theory to physiology. In a series of papers from 1945 
to 1952, McCulloch and Pitts formulated the mathematical theory 
CODED  AESTHETICS 85
of the mind, pointing to the similarity in abstract function between 
the human brain and the computing device. McCulloch and Pitts 
endeavored to show how the physical sciences of mathematics helped 
to explain biological functioning of the brain. Other scientists studied 
the possibilities of intelligently controlled machinery as models for 
human behavior. Norbert Wiener believed there was a unity among 
all these investigations. In 1948, Wiener incorporated this vision 
under the name “cybernetics.” He described this combinatory field 
as based on the essential unity of the set of problems concerning the 
interrelationship between communication, control, and statistical 
mechanics, whether in biological or mechanical form. In the 
1960s, cybernetics became a paradigm for a variety of biological, 
mechanical, and cultural processes across a number of humanist 
disciplines. Suddenly, discourses such as the visual arts, which had 
been relatively impervious to science, began showing the theoretical 
effects of abstract system-based science.
Although there were artists like Roy Ascott who conceptualized 
their practice in terms of cybernetic theory without making overt 
links to digital technology, it was logical for computer art to be 
understood through cybernetic metaphors, because the computer 
was the prime experimental instrument and in many ways the 
material embodiment of cybernetics. One of the central features of 
cybernetics was the insistence that organisms and machines were 
not essentially different in effect. This meant that scientists using 
cybernetics could derive general models of control processes from 
living systems and apply them to the construction of machines. 
The idea of cybernetics in the arts made its most visible entrance 
through the visionary curator and writer Jasia Reichardt. The 
first international exhibition to include computer art, Cybernetic 
Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts , highlighted cybernetics 
as its incorporative theme. The 1968 exhibition, which has 
become a seminal moment in digital art’s history, took two years 
of painstaking organization. The exhibition complemented other 
exhibitions of the period, such as Jack Burnham’s Software , which 
centered on the idea of the world as information, logic, and system, 
rather than energy or material constitution. Beyond curating the 
seminal Software  exhibition in 1970, Jack Burnham, through his 
book Beyond Modern Sculpture  and his article “Real Time Systems,” 
signaled a shift away from an object-oriented world toward a 
systems-oriented world.30 Burnham believed that this “system 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 86
aesthetics” had become a major paradigm in the arts. In Art into 
Ideas , Robert C. Morgan credited Burnham’s system aesthetics as 
having clarified the “feeling that art had transversed from the object 
to the idea, from a material definition of art to that of a system of 
thought.”31 The overarching idea was that art was another form 
of information—one that could be systemized and mentally or 
mechanically processed. The artist Robert Mallary also popularized 
cybernetics in the seminal essay “Computer Sculpture: Six Levels 
of Cybernetics,” which communicated a model of cybernetics that 
imagined the computer as an autonomous organism.32
Including visual arts, poetry, music, dance, film, and animation, 
the Cybernetic Serendipity  exhibition employed the general theme 
of cybernetics to explore the connection between creativity and 
technology.33 Many of the works in the exhibition reflected the brave 
new world of technology-based art, such as robotics, electronic 
music, multimedia installations, and the like. However, the graphic 
component of computer art, with its recourse to experimental 
aesthetics, had a deeper aim, which was to probe the pictorial 
tradition by producing a mathematical theory of art. The computer, 
Franke recognized, could place the “whole field of aesthetics as 
well as artistic practice onto new foundations.”34 Influenced by the 
models from cybernetics and information theory, many sought to 
understand artistic production, reception, and criticism in terms 
of feedback loops or communication cycles. Building on previous 
formal theory that evaluated art statistically, mathematicians 
and physical scientists began moving toward contemporary 
psychological approaches in the examination of visual knowledge 
and aesthetics. The influential American scientist John R. Pierce, in 
his book Symbols, Signals, and Noise  (1961), stated that art was 
clearly a communication phenomenon, and Abraham Moles, in 
Information Theory and Esthetic Perception  (1966), sought to make 
the communication in art into a science. The new experimental 
methods developed through information theory, psychology, and 
aesthetics had an enduring effect on computer art, yet were not 
easily assimilated by humanist critics. The new modes of visual 
research emanating from cybernetics and information theory 
required specialized knowledge of both science and technology that 
went far beyond the parameters of most art theorists and critics.
The desire to generate new formal aesthetic systems and laws 
permeated computer art in West Germany. While in America the 
CODED  AESTHETICS 87
computer had been met with focused pragmatism, in West Germany 
it was considered the perfect tool to investigate and establish new 
theories of aesthetics and question the very idea of “beauty and 
art.”35 Whereas the North American technologists employed the 
computer to capture “routine processes of artistic creation,” they 
did not “introduce a progressive element” into art, which for Franke 
was the “trend towards theorizing.”36 The Europeans felt that the 
pragmatism in the United States meant that programming and 
technical possibilities dominated the subject of computer graphics at 
the expense of theoretical considerations, which was confirmed by 
Otto Piene, one of the founders of Zero, who came to the United 
States in 1964 to teach at the University of Pennsylvania. Otto stated 
that Americans “make things, as opposed to merely thinking about 
them.”37 Indeed, it was some time before the possibility of formal 
systems presented itself to the American commentators. One of 
the earliest articles about this in the United States, “Artistic Design 
by Computers” (1964) by Leslie Mezei, outlined the possibility 
for formulating general laws of aesthetics that could aid in artistic 
design.38 Mezei called attention to American mathematician George 
D. Birkhoff’s Aesthetic Measure  (1933), a text also influential to the 
West Germans, as a possible starting point, but the article had little 
effect on the American technologists. Although there was discussion 
about the application of the computer to design, the art produced in 
the United States in the late 1960s did not engage at any depth with the 
new formal aesthetic theories. Their Western European counterparts, 
however, constructed entire formal theories with the possibility for 
building art systems that generated and evaluated works of art.
Germany had a well-established tradition in formal aesthetics or 
“exact aesthetics,” as it was known. For Franke, these formalized 
models could provide the theoretical foundation for computer art. 
As Franke noted, “the setting of stylistic laws in an algorithmic form 
is a precondition for the generation of computer art” and “each of 
its products may serve as a preliminary study for investigations in 
the science of art.”39 They believed that the programmed computer 
could “make aesthetic distinctions, choices, and assessments,” and 
“organize and compose art of a superior quality automatically.”40 
The quest to generate “aesthetic structures” or, in the case of the 
computer, to “program the beautiful” was an idea first proposed in 
1965 by the German philosopher, mathematician, and semiotician 
Max Bense.41
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 88
Through the 1960s, Max Bense with Abraham Moles 
established new foundations for aesthetics through information 
theory. Influenced by Birkhoff’s numerically orientated aesthetic 
measure, which considered the values of order and complexity, 
Bense developed a more general theory that incorporated Weaver’s 
and Shannon’s mathematical theory of communication. Calling the 
theory “information aesthetics,” Bense’s model became influential 
in several disciplines and in research centers across central Europe. 
With a number of like-minded semioticians, Bense co-founded 
the Stuttgart School at the Technische Universitat, which became 
one of the major European centers for research into aesthetics. 
Importantly, this site, through Bense’s suggestion, held Europe’s first 
computer art exhibition. Bense’s vision remains the foundation for 
Franco-German digital art to this day.
As one of the founding fathers of computational aesthetics, 
Bense was a major philosophical inspiration for computer artists. 
Bense also had a more direct influence on popularizing computer 
art: he suggested the idea for a large-scale international computer 
art exhibition to Jasia Reichardt, which resulted in Cybernetic 
Serendipity . For Franke, Bense had anticipated the principles 
of computer art in his work Aesthetica  (1965), a project where 
Bense theorized the ability to “Program the Beautiful.” Two 
students—Georg Nees, who studied with Bense, and Frieder Nake, 
who attended Bense’s lectures—became pioneers of computer 
art in Western Europe. Utilizing Bense’s theoretical model of 
informational aesthetics, the mathematicians embodied many of his 
concepts. Bense’s information aesthetics gave rules for computing 
complexity and order for a specific image. Through both statistical 
analysis and aesthetic laws, mathematicians constructed models of 
art by simulating art objects. Nake, like Noll, saw the advantages of 
programming stylistic laws. Nake went on to simulate paintings by 
Paul Klee and Hans Hartung (Figure 2.8). Nake was so committed 
to this type of investigation that he believed it was necessary to 
abandon art for a decade and focus on the aesthetic fundamentals 
of visual perception.42
For computer artists, the most important area of Bense’s 
semiotics was his theory of “generative aesthetics.” He coined 
the terms “artificial art” and “generative aesthetics” in his main 
work Aesthetica  (1965). Artificial art was introduced by Bense to 
distinguish mechanically produced art from art deriving solely from 
CODED  AESTHETICS 89
human productivity, or “natural art” as he called it. Bense considered 
computer art to be the prime example of “artificial art.” For the 
West Germans, it was not just a matter of completing experiments 
in graphic design, determining the aesthetic norms, or investigating 
applied visual psychology; there was a desire to see if the computer 
could generate aesthetic properties. In principle, would it be possible 
to frame programs with general laws of aesthetics to bring about 
an optical aesthetic effect? Nake conceived of the computer as a 
“Universal Picture Generator” capable of creating every possible 
picture out of a blend of available picture elements.43 Through Bense’s 
theories, the idea of the computer as an entire system of art making 
emerged. The computer was not merely a tool, which characterized FIGURE 2.8  Frieder Nake, 13/9/65 Nr. 2  (also known as Homage à Paul 
Klee), 1965. China ink on paper. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 90
the attitude in the United States, but was a machine that embodied 
the rule and formula of art. Out of this research, mathematicians 
and technologists constructed a series of art-producing programs 
with inbuilt graphic parameters, such as pseudo randomness, that 
became the model for many art and graphic systems of the future.
One main disjuncture between computer art and abstract 
modernism is the emphasis placed on the mysterious qualities of 
mechanical chance. Computer artists were more fascinated by 
the possibilities of producing vast amounts of geometric form by 
building a simple coded mechanism for chance. This shift was 
taking place at the time when the relationship between order and 
disorder became increasingly relevant in both scientific and artistic 
realms. Writing before the emergence of computer art, Umberto Eco 
saw in European optical art the innate potential of mathematical 
randomness.44
One of the most celebrated features of the computer technique was 
the ability to have, as Japanese artist Tsuchiya suggested, “systems 
and randomness at the same time.”45 Tsuchiya imagined the “secrets 
of wonderful works” in the balance of order and randomness.46 The 
American computer scientist John R. Pierce, writing in Playboy , 
would call it the “artistic utterances of mechanical chance.”47 But 
it was Meyer Schapiro who was the only art historian and critic to 
recognize the potential of digital chance in formal analysis, using 
Noll’s Mondrian Experiment to probe order and randomness in 
Mondrian’s abstract composition.48
Early in the computer’s development, Allan Turing in his 1950 
Computing Machinery and Intelligence  recognized that an interesting 
variant in a digital computer was the random element. From the very 
beginning, computer artists sought to create chance procedures that 
would result in new unexpected data. The random chance factor 
allows the computer to make unpredictable and arbitrary selections 
without subjective involvement, an attribute not possible in human. 
This interest in random behavior, what Franke called the “generative 
impulse,” was a transcultural phenomenon and became a key factor 
in computer art discourse. The computer works by Nake, Nees, 
and Noll that emerged in the first year all utilized programs that 
generated random results. Randomness was even a large part of the 
analog art phenomenon of Laposky’s Electronic Abstractions .
The search for random behavior is an enduring trait of human 
behavior. For many, chance somehow revealed the unfathomable 
CODED  AESTHETICS 91
convulsions of nature. Most often, the use of randomizers in societies 
was to ensure fairness, to prevent dissension, and to attain divine 
direction. The methods for generating chance or randomization 
were diverse from casting animal bones to tossing many-sided 
die. The use of chance mechanism to solicit divine direction—
called divination—was to guarantee the elimination of human 
interference, so that the will of the deity could be discerned. Since 
antiquity, the subject of probability had long been a field of interest 
within mathematics. Mathematicians called a series of random 
behaviors “stochastic,” from the Greek word stochos , meaning “to 
guess.” For much of its history, the field of probability analyzed 
mostly numerical and statistical data; but in the nineteenth century, 
mathematicians began visualizing random behavior. In the 1866 
edition of The Logic of Chance , the English logician John Venn 
attempted a visual illustration of randomness by building a randomly 
generated graph (Figure 2.9). Each step of his random path was 
taken by allowing random movement in any of eight directions. The 
direction of movement at each step along the path was determined 
by using the digits in the decimal expansion of pi (π), a sequence 
of digits that Venn believed random. Striking for Venn was that 
a small number of fixed rules produced an unpredictable amount 
of complexity. Venn’s graph exhibits similarities in pattern and 
structure to Manfred Mohr’s computer-generated P018 Random 
Walk , completed just under a century later (Figure 2.10). During 
the 1950s, theorists noticed that linguistic rules have the effect of 
opening up new realms of activity. Generative grammars were seen 
as immensely powerful in their capacity to generate sentences. The 
rules leave a system essentially open and incomplete, always capable 
of novelty. Increasingly, computer art would be conceptualized 
through the generative structures in language.
Of course, the use of a randomizer in art was not new. Random 
behavior had always had an affinity with the unknown. The idea 
of chance happenings was popular in the work of the Dadaists, 
who were attempting to overcome the ideologies of rational 
order. Although artists like Hans Arp incorporated random and 
arbitrary effects into their collages, Dadaists’ chance mechanism 
was significantly different from mechanical chance, which had an 
element of precision and determinism. Because the computer is a 
determined system, the random number generators do not generate 
numbers that are random, making true chance unattainable. The 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 92
generator programs use deterministic algorithms, so they are more 
correctly referred to as pseudorandom number generators since the 
sequences of numbers they produce are purely deterministic and 
merely approximate true random sequences. Although computers 
are determined systems, the sciences have found it necessary to 
incorporate random numbers into programs to simulate biological 
or sociological phenomena. Within the mythology of Dada, Arp’s 
work was presented as the product of pure chance, and Surrealist 
automatism revealed the actions of the unconscious. However, the 
computer’s random procedure distanced the artist entirely from 
the process. The computer artist needed to define the parameters of 
randomness prior to beginning, whereas modern artists most often 
encouraged chance during the actual artistic event. For computer 
artists, randomness was more than a metaphor of creativity; 
it was the actual means or methodology of realizing machine FIGURE 2.9  John Venn’s visual representation of randomness, The Logic 
of Chance  (1866).

CODED  AESTHETICS 93
production. “The computer acquired a creative role,” said Noll, 
“by introducing randomness or by using mathematical algorithms 
to control certain aspects of the artistic creation.”49 Bense pointed 
out that randomness stood in for intuition. Following Bense, 
Franke concluded that a “clear-cut description of a work of 
art” required certain degrees of freedom, which the artist filled 
intuitively.50 Franke also observed that the making of computer art 
as the simulation of an artistic process must “capture intuition in 
the form of a model.”51
In many ways, randomness was a procedure with which to 
disrupt the predictability of the computer. For some, however, 
aleatory behavior suggested a world of possibility, and many of 
these, such as Anthony Oettinger, viewed the random computer as a 
creative actor rather than as a simply generative instrument. When FIGURE 2.10  Manfred Mohr, P018 Random Walk,  1969. Computer-
calculated drawing on paper, 23.5 × 19.7 in. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 94
the computer generated unexpected or serendipitous results, many 
saw the resulting structures as novel discoveries (note the allusion 
to chance in the title of the exhibition Cybernetic Serendipity ). Even 
though the computer follows deterministic laws, the laws have 
complicated consequences that are extremely difficult to predict. 
As Charles Csuri suggested, it was “impossible to visualize” what 
would happen once the random procedure is initiated.52
The other more enduring use of mechanical chance in computer 
art was the generation of multiple designs, series, and permutations. 
In West Germany, mathematicians soon recognized that one could 
set up an algorithm for generating entire families of forms. Using 
random numbers to determine where and how to place graphic 
elements allowed the artist to produce new aesthetic configurations. 
A repertoire of objects would be generated in which the artist could 
make an aesthetic decision, eventually choosing the parameters that 
were producing the most interesting object.
The stochastic procedures implemented in Georg Nees’ 
23-Corner Graphic  (Figure 2.11) provide a good example of 
the way random parameters and generative functions produce 
variation in figure and form. The program for each graphic 
“repeats generative fundamental operations” so that a repetition 
of forms is produced, and also the random parametric values 
ensure that the form is diversified.53 Simple rules are established 
in which points are distributed randomly within a figure square 
and joined by lines, resulting in different configurations. Marc 
Adrian, writing in response to the 1969 Vienna exhibition Kunst 
und Computer , believed that the importance of computer art was 
found in it “aleatoric moments,” where a “practically inexhaustible 
number of dissimilar realizations is possible.”54 The mathematical 
field of potential was to have an enduring effect on computer art 
consciousness, yet art critics seemed indifferent, not realizing the 
impact this new process would eventually have on art.
Although there were relatively few computational processes 
available to computer artists, there was a significant variety and 
range in early computer art. This heterogeneity was another factor 
that prevented computer art from being confined to an early abstract 
modernist paradigm. Moreover, the variation in content, especially 
in Japan, contradicts the frequent charge that computer art had 
an unvarying aesthetic. Generating abstract configurations from 
mathematical parameters was not the only computer art procedure 
CODED  AESTHETICS 95
available. In the United States and Japan, technologists were 
developing new techniques whereby existing visual imagery could 
be put through a transformative process. The techniques employed 
resulted from formal scientific research relating to mathematical 
investigations of visual phenomena, such as the human perception 
of pattern. While there had been plenty of mathematically conceived 
figuration, many technologists saw the pivotal aspect of computer FIGURE 2.11  Georg Nees, 23-Corner Graphic  (also known as 23 Vertices ), 
1965. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 96
art to be in certain techniques described as picture processing. 
Pioneers of these techniques, Leon Harmon and Kenneth Knowlton, 
of Bell Labs, defined them as “either the transformation of graphical 
material, or the generation of pictures from data or abstract rules 
alone, or combinations of these operations.”55 Seen as revolutionary, 
the picture processing technique enabled the computer to 
recreate the visual world as well as transform it through various 
morphological processes. Optical scanners automated the task of 
entering visual data into the computer and in effect revealed the 
potential of machine vision. Picture transformation or transposition 
established the framework or parameters that manipulate picture 
information. This included the interpolation of picture data—a 
form of picture analysis—involving the transformation of a linear 
image into another through the calculation of a variable number of 
new values between two existing values.
Even though much of the first computer art was abstract, 
consisting of mostly geometrical elements, artists such as Charles 
Csuri introduced figuration into the computational process. Csuri, 
one of the only trained artists working in the area of computer 
graphics, produced, along with programmer James Shaffer, the first 
artist figurative award-winning computer artwork, Sine Curve Man  
(Figure 2.12). First taken from a hand-drawn picture by Csuri, 
the visual information was digitalized and the coordinates were 
assigned to its outlines. After the data was transformed with sine-
curve functions, the composition was plotted. As a symbolic action, 
the human, or at least its representation, is encoded into information 
to be processed. The digitization of human information or form 
became an enduring idea within the 1990s discourse of virtuality, 
especially as the avatar emerged as a potent cultural symbol in the 
new digital age.
However, critics such as Canaday found picture processing to be 
“tricky” distortions, “momentarily diverting at best, but frequently 
just plain ugly and always pointless.”56 His criticism came from the 
fact that no subjective interpretation was done by the artist—the 
pictures were merely “fed” into the computer to be transformed. 
Ironically, what Canaday called for, explicit in his title “Less Art, 
More Computer, Please,” was more mathematically inspired and 
precisely generated art, what he saw as the computer’s essential 
talent. But as visual computing developed, it was picture processing 
that became its core pursuit and application.
CODED  AESTHETICS 97
What is missed by critics is that the early stages of computer art 
revealed the coalescence of logic and perceptual elements within the 
digital image. Through picture processing, the mechanisms of logic 
internalize traditional pictorial representation in revolutionary new 
ways. In Harmon and Knowlton’s Studies in Perception: Gargoyle  
(Figure 2.13), discrete symbols are combined to produce the pictorial 
image—an image of the most famous gargoyle on the westwork 
of Notre Dame with Sacré-Coeur Basilica in the background. 
The original picture, in this case a photograph, is treated as merely  FIGURE 2.12  Charles A. Csuri, Sine Curve Man,  1967. Black ink on 
paper. IBM 7084 and drum plotter, 41 × 41 in. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 98
visual data and converted from analog into digital. Once digitally 
encoded, the image is overlaid with a grid and transformed 
into a series of tone value indicators, which allows the pictorial 
information to be manipulated in any number of variations. In 
this case, the tonal values are assigned to a micro pattern of iconic 
symbols (Figure 2.14). These isolated ideograms were a precursor 
to what became known in computer graphics as the picture element 
or pixel. The transformation of acquired imagery became a major 
idiomatic practice in the coming decades.
The Tokyo-based Computer Technique Group (CTG), 
established in 1966 by a group of young engineers, also developed 
a number of data transformative techniques. The group consisted 
of eight individuals whose professions included architectural FIGURE 2.13  Leon Harmon and Kenneth Knowlton, Studies in Percep -
tion: Gargoyle,  1967. Courtesy of Kenneth Knowlton.

CODED  AESTHETICS 99
design, behavioral science, and systems engineering. They produced 
a manifesto of sorts which claimed, as Jasia Reichardt wrote, 
the “restoration of man’s innate rights of existence by means of 
computer control.”57 They saw themselves as “brain workers” in 
this operation.58 Beyond producing computer-generated artworks, 
they created mathematical models for community developments. 
They also engineered a computer that completed paintings in a 
gallery environment. Entitled Automatic Painting Machine No 1 , 
the computer installation became a well-publicized event in Tokyo. 
Reichardt recognized that the images produced by CTG were not 
only different from those produced elsewhere, but were the “most 
imaginative.”59 While Japanese computer art shares many elements 
with U.S. and European computer art, it does have some distinct FIGURE 2.14  Detail from Studies in Perception: Gargoyle.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 100
qualities. The computer artwork of the Europeans was entirely 
abstract, while the Japanese produced predominantly figurative 
work. They were far less formal than their German and American 
counterparts, injecting whimsy into their work. Some of the more 
adventurous work they called “computer metamorphosis.”60 Return 
to Square A  and Return to Square B  (Figure 2.15) were a prime 
example of figurative and abstract transformation: a square is 
transformed into a profile of a woman and then back into a square.
Along with the interpolation of visual data, which had also been 
practiced by technologists in the United States, the CTG produced 
a series based on the image of the late American president John F. 
Kennedy. With a similar system to the Harmon and Knowlton 
picture processing technique, CTG subjected an image of Kennedy 
to a deformation program that scanned the image, transformed it 
into digital encoding, and then transformed it into a net pattern. The 
rather impish Shot Kennedy No. 1  (Figure 2.16) takes data from a 
photograph and converts it into straight lines that converge at the 
point relative to where Kennedy was shot. The engineers used other 
American iconography such as Marilyn Monroe and Coca-Cola in 
their computer art. This contrasts with the American experience in 
which images were arbitrary. There is some evidence to suggest that the 
Japanese were influenced by Pop art iconography. Japanese Pop art, 
a short-lived movement in the early 1960s, may well have influenced 
these engineers. This Neo-Dada generation of Japanese artists also 
FIGURE 2.15  Computer Technique Group, Return to Square A  (left) 
and Return to Square B  (right), 1968. Courtesy of Kohmura Masao.

CODED  AESTHETICS 101
took an interest in reproductive technologies, producing imitation art 
and a type of Pop art process called “imitating the imitators.”
Like the Western Europeans, the Japanese attempted to place 
computer art on a theoretical foundation. Haruki Tsuchiya in 
“The Philosophy of Computer Art” (1969) was the first to ask 
the question of what was the philosophical nature of computer 
art and its implication for the world of aesthetics.61 Going beyond 
the American insistence on the suitability of the computer as an 
instrument, the CTG suggested that it was “not enough only to say 
that the computer is a good tool for an artist—we must discuss 
what computer art is.”62 Most importantly, though, CTG was the FIGURE 2.16  Computer Technique Group, Shot Kennedy No. 1,  1968. 
Courtesy of Kohmura Masao.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 102
first to envisage the artist as a constructor of a system—a system 
that would create large amounts of form rather than individual 
artworks.
Rather than prefiguring the parameters of a program and then 
merely letting the computer generate a single figure, the Europeans 
and Japanese began conceptualizing computer art in terms of an 
art-making system. Because the system prevails over the form, the 
program itself becomes the work of art. This idea would become 
central to orthodox computer artists in the 1980s. The works, which 
were a series of repetitions and variations with subtle differences, 
are mere by-products of the system. One of the members of CTG, 
Masao Komura, proposed the thesis that true art was the discovery 
of a system.
Many mainstream critics saw the potential for endless repetition 
of slightly varying forms as monotonous, with Canaday finding 
this “familiar type of computer art” tedious.63 Yet in 1970, the 
year the conservative critic wrote his opinions, a significant shift 
in computer art practice was taking place. The following chapter, 
“Virtual Renaissance,” explores this shift in praxis. Expanding 
beyond the mathematical mysticism and formal aesthetic traditions, 
there was a move toward the traditional art genre of landscape. This 
was caused by a shift away from the scientist/technologist model 
toward artists who possessed hybrid abilities. The emergence of the 
“artist-programmer,” a term first used by Noll in 1962, corresponds 
to a new-found optimism in computer art. Crucially, at this time 
women entered the once male-dominated domain of computing. 
Their presence resulted in a raft of new criticism and historical 
accounts. Although the rational and reductive were still privileged, 
and the empirical study of art remained hegemonic, artists began 
introducing subjectivity and intuition into the ultra-objective 
world of computer art. Traditional genres, such as landscape and 
figuration, began to materialize. In addition, artists began working 
against the precision and order of the machine. The systematic 
exploration of a field of possibilities, investigated tentatively in 
the 1960s, became a major paradigm in the 1970s, with heuristic 
methods developed for surveying the aesthetic forms and objects 
generated by computers.
“A new kind of renaissance is beginning,” artists Colette and Jeffery 
Bangert announced in 1976, “All those now working visually with 
the computer are Giottos announcing the coming of a new visual 
age.”1 Fellow computer artist Ruth Leavitt, with similar unbounded 
confidence, believed that soon a “Leonardo of computer art will 
come.”2 These two proclamations typify the newfound optimism of 
computer artists in the 1970s, and demonstrate how the humanist 
dream for cultural unification, so dominant in the 1960s, had 
become a central ideology in computer art discourse. Computer 
artists increasingly reflected on the Renaissance, with its natural 
blend of the sciences and humanities, as a template for practice and 
beacon for inspiration. Some even held the then hyperbolic belief 
that this period in the development of computer art was, as Vladimir 
Bonačič asserted, as “significant as the Renaissance.”3 Leavitt, along 
with a myriad of other artists, evoked the revered Renaissance 
figure of Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo, as the exemplar for creative 
genius and unified practice, became an icon and central trope within 
computer art discourse. The new breed of computer artist easily 
identified with Leonardo. Like the great master, the computer artist 
required wide-ranging cultural and scientific learning and a natural 
curiosity that took the artist far beyond normative paradigms. 
For Leavitt, the new computer artist was—like the great master—
the “true universal person,” as she described.4 Leonardo , under 
founding editor Frank Malina (and later under his son Roger), 
emphasized the Renaissance dream of cultural unification through 
the journal’s mission and title. Even critics of computer art, such as CHAPTER THREE
Virtual renaissance
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 104
Robert E. Mueller, invoked Leonardo as representing the symbiosis 
of science and art with the potential for resolving humanity’s 
problems.5 However, the artistic zeal that defined the computer art 
renaissance would be more of a mirage, as disparaging criticism 
and competing interests would eventually dissolve the hope and 
optimism once held.
It was apparent to all those involved in computer art that if the 
movement was going to be sustainable it would require its own 
mythology. By the early 1970s, the momentum that computer 
art had harnessed from the Art and Technology movement was 
rapidly dissipating as that enterprise disintegrated. The demise 
of the Art and Technology project was relatively swift. Two 
significant events in the early 1970s spelt the movement’s end: first, 
the closure of the Howard Wise Gallery in New York, which for 
eleven years had been the primary promoter and sponsor of new 
technological art forms; and second, the closure of the ambitious 
Software  exhibition at the Jewish Museum in New York—curated 
by Jack Burnham—as a result of a number of technical disasters. 
According to Douglas Davis, other exhibitions opened with a 
“great flourish, only to run slowly down piece by piece, as time 
passed.”6 Technical difficulties and cost not only discouraged 
many artists from experimenting with advanced technology, but 
also contributed to public disenchantment.7 Large institutions 
were less likely to exhibit technically complex exhibitions. In 
1969, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., imported 
the entire Cybernetic Serendipity  exhibition from the Institute of 
Contemporary Arts in London, and then decided not to install 
it because of freight problems and the exhibition’s technological 
complexity. Exhibition space was also a problem. Virtually in every 
large anthology exhibition of technological art, the premises were 
too small. For Davis, the careless and inadequate installation by the 
art establishment reflected insensitivity toward the technological 
art and betrayed what was really a “facile acceptance” by the art 
institutions.8 Coupled with the dramatic decline in public interest, 
the avant-garde capriciously abandoned the movement. Movements 
such as pop art, environmental art, fluxus, happenings, and process 
art, which had courted technology’s potential as a path of aesthetic 
experimentation, no longer found it viable.
Beyond technical problems and the unresponsive and ill-prepared 
art world, the once celebrated collaborative approach broke down. 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 105
The optimism with which avant-garde artists courted industry 
collaboration cooled considerably by the end of the decade. By the 
early 1970s, EAT, which had organized and coordinated many of 
these collaborations, was in crisis. EAT had suffered terribly at the 
hands of the Pepsi-Cola Company, which withdrew its support after 
Klüver and his colleagues had designed an intelligent environment 
for the company’s pavilion at the 1970 Osaka World’s Fair. This, 
according to Davis, cost EAT heavily in morale and public support. 
For the critics and artists, who opposed collaboration with profit-
oriented firms from the start, the crisis proved their point. In 1971, 
Max Kozloff in his Art Forum  piece “Multimillion Dollar Art 
Boondoggle” gave what Burnham described as the “most vicious, 
inflammatory, and irrational attack ever written on the art and 
technology phenomenon.”9 Kozloff depicted the artists involved in 
the “lavishly funded” A&T project held at the Los Angeles County 
Museum as “fledgling technocrats, acting out mad science fiction 
fantasies,” while the “more sophisticated artists he envisaged as 
cynical opportunists.”10
The economic depression following the Vietnam War also 
significantly challenged the Art and Technology movement’s 
viability. There were significant cutbacks in government and 
corporate support for the arts which threatened the expensive 
technological collaborations. Moreover, the Art and Technology 
movement’s demise must be viewed in relation to the growing 
discontent surrounding the Vietnam War and the worldwide protest 
over social inequality, which reached its apogee in the late 1960s. 
Although artists and scientists had attempted to overcome the 
profound fissure between culture and science, what John Cohen 
called the “chief occupational diseases of the age,”11 the collective 
mood, characterized by the rising counterculture, counteracted 
and negated the utopian sentiments advocated by a small band of 
likeminded artists and scientists. To begin with, scientific humanism 
had become highly questionable among counter culturists who 
linked the problems of modern society to the enduring ideology 
of Enlightenment science, with its rationalist and mechanistic 
worldview. Theodore Roszak’s The Making of a Counter Culture , 
published at the close of the decade, attempted to deprivilege science 
and its ways of knowing. The critique of science, found widely 
through literature in the 1960s, highlighted the misuse and abuse of 
science and questioned science’s status as the dominant knowledge 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 106
system. Another highly influential text, Mumford’s The Pentagon of 
Power  (1970), took a deeply pessimistic view of a technology-driven 
science. More popular with the rising counterculture was the work 
of Herbert Marcuse, who achieved a cult status in the early 1970s. 
Charting the ideological context of technology in government and 
business, Marcuse informed the genesis of postmodern sensibility in 
the 1970s, which eventually rejected the computer as a system-based 
machine that institutionalized and dehumanized the individual. 
By the early 1970s, much of the art world perceived, as Burnham 
suggested, a “nefarious connection between advanced technology 
and the architects of late capitalism.”12
The cultural perception of technology was not the only problem 
besetting the Art and Technology movement. Internally, there was 
an inability to bridge the cultural divide. The “semantic curtain,” as 
computer scientist Walter Finke described it, impeded collaborative 
efforts.13 As he saw it, a “language barrier,” which was as “real 
as any that exist in the world,” separated the technocrat from 
the remainder of society.14 Finke identified a growing problem 
within technology-based research industries, which resulted in a 
disjuncture between the technologists and the rest of society. He 
identified logic, hypothesis, scientific method, and the appeal to 
specific audiences as the means for the technologists to advance 
in their discipline. Finke went on to say that “by and large this 
society [of technologists] is preoccupied with its own ponderously 
constructed orthodoxy” and “stands aloof.”15 Shackled by a 
“consuming allegiance to the Scientific Method” and protected by 
the organizations that employ them, the technologist was becoming 
ever more introspective.16 During the early 1970s many articles 
appeared that described the problem associated with collaborative 
efforts between artists on the one hand and the scientists, engineers, 
and technologists on the other. With the different modes of language 
and methodology, the scientists complained that they simply could 
not understand the artists or their motives. Artist and designer, 
Robert Preusser outlined the problem as follows:
Rather than allowing technology to play its historical role 
in the evolution of visual form, the artist persistently imposes 
preconceived rhetoric upon the vernacular of technics. Having 
discarded all traditional concepts of art except the concept of 
the artist himself, he resists sharing his signature with those of 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 107
other disciplines on the forms they might create in concert. While 
it is true that the engineer is frequently called upon to assist in 
technological matters, he is usually an accessory after the fact 
and rarely encouraged to collaborate creatively in the search for 
relevant, contemporary visual form. Because of this failure to 
engage specialists at the conceptual level, the visual potential of 
many technological territories remains unexplored.17
Preusser also acknowledged that the scientist was remiss in 
approaching the most pressing cultural challenges. Most scientists 
were “reluctant to extend their concerns beyond the technical aspect 
of their disciplines,” and they “perpetuate the myth that science and 
art are foreign.”18 For Frank Malina, the artists considered scientists 
“uncooperative because they tell the artist that their ideas violate 
the laws of nature, demand inventions that have not been made or 
would cost vast sums of money to be accomplished.”19
Because the artist and scientist often reduced each other 
to caricature, the sustainability of collaborative projects and 
the utopianism espoused by Rauschenburg, Klüver, and Cage 
evaporated.  As Jonathan Benthall wrote at the start of the new 
decade, “Great hopes have been expressed about the reuniting of art 
with science and technology … but this area of creative activity …  
has proved to be difficult both theoretically and practically.”20 
Claes Oldenburg, one of the high-profile artists involved with 
the Los Angeles County Museum of Art project, pointed out that 
the process of working with an engineer was “painful, for both 
sides … It’s a challenge to the artist’s subjectivity.”21
The collaborative effort within computer art was also a difficult 
affair. Because computers were restricted until the late 1970s to 
governmental, industrial, and academic settings, collaborative 
endeavors represented the only possible way artists could employ 
the digital medium. By the end of 1969, the Japanese computer 
art group CTG, which had shown great promise, disbanded 
because of problematic collaborations. Haruki Tsuchiya said that 
the collaborative effort had not been as easy as expected and that 
ultimately artists and technologists are essentially different.22 Mezei 
felt that collaborative efforts were on the whole disappointing 
and that both factions remained committed to their own narrow 
understanding.23 Noll was one technologist who signaled the 
difficulty in cooperative ventures; the experience resulted in his 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 108
refusal to work with artists. Noll concluded that artist/scientist 
collaborations were ineffective because of the artist’s inability 
to translate ideas into formal scientific languages. Noll had 
become discouraged at the inability of artists to verbalize their 
intentions. Likewise, Knowlton described the different attitudes 
that artists and programmers possessed. Reemphasising existing 
stereotypes from the Two Cultures  debate, Knowlton used terms 
such as “illogical, intuitive, implicit, direct, impulsive, inexplicit, 
inarticulate and vulnerable to criticism” to describe the artist.24 
In countering these typical artistic traits, programmers required a 
methodology that was “constricted, constrained, logical, precise, 
ritualistic, defensive and well-prepared with their defence.”25 
Knowlton in the coming decades would provide a more nuanced 
account of his collaborations, regretting some of the generalizations 
made in his previous writings and identifying the productive and 
distinctive outcomes born through these associations.26 While these 
collaborative ventures are some of the most unique in the history 
of twentieth-century art, they remain problematic even today, as 
disagreement over copyright or what role each party played in the 
production of the artwork often surfaces.
In the short term, computer art’s fate seemed tied to the Art 
and Technology movement. After reaching the height of popularity 
with the international exhibition Cybernetic Serendipity , computer 
art saw its public support begin to wane. Many artists retreated 
from collaborative efforts and from what Benthall described as the 
“difficulties of operating in the no-man’s-land where art overlaps with 
science and technology.”27 However, harnessed to an ever-evolving 
technology, computer art found support in a number of nascent 
industries. More importantly, trained artists showed increasing 
interest in the computer. Inspired by the Cybernetic Serendipity  
exhibition, many realized that computer art could only have a future 
if artists took to the medium. The Japanese technologists from CTG 
believed that the artist, not the engineer, should explore computer 
art. Franke also recognized that computer art’s viability was linked 
to its engagement with the artistic community. For Franke, computer 
art needed the “habitual methods” and the “competition” of the art 
world; if not, it would “remain ineffective as long as it is confined 
within scientific institutes and laboratories.”28
After the large-scale exhibition and new publications by Franke 
and Reichardt on the subject, computer art appeared to hold great 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 109
promise. Some believed that computer art was more than a “passing 
fashion” and that it could be of “decisive importance for the next 
millennium.”29 Further, computer art had the “potential of becoming 
great art” and from it, William Spencer Jarnagin concluded, “will 
emerge master computer artists analogous to Picasso.”30 In 1969, 
Georg Nees published the first doctoral dissertation on computer 
art.31 Also in that year, the Computer Arts Society was formed 
in London to promote the creative potential of computers in art. 
Founded in 1968 by George Mallen, Alan Sutcliffe, and John 
Lansdown as a subsidiary of the British Computer Society, the 
society was set up to facilitate the growth of computers in art. As a 
highly successful venture, the society produced the magazine PAGE , 
which featured international computer artists’ works and seminal 
writings concerning computer art practice. Encouragingly, Charles 
Csuri’s computer artwork Hummingbird  was purchased by the 
Museum of Modern Art in New York for its permanent collection. 
In 1970, an international contingent of computer artists, most of 
them still calling themselves mathematicians and technologists, 
exhibited at the Venice Biennale. For the first time, Lecci, Nake, 
Nees, Franke, and the Japanese group CTG exhibited next to works 
by constructivists such as Josef Albers and Max Bill.
Computer art’s future was also becoming more secure through 
new publications. Grace Hertlein, one of the chief computer art 
commentators in the 1970s, expected that “given greater space 
in the mass media” the audience would eventually widen for 
computer art.32 While there was no support from mainstream visual 
art publications, fortunately the Art and Technology movement 
provided a legacy of interest for technologically orientated art. 
The international journal Leonardo , with its Renaissance inspired 
vision, was the most significant. The journal, first publishing in 
1968 at the height of enthusiasm for cultural unification, was 
crucial to computer art’s feasibility. Leonardo  eventually assumed 
the popularizing and disseminating role that Computers and 
Automation  once held and became a lasting voice for computer 
art. Adopting an international outlook, the journal focused on 
the intersection between art, science, and technology. Modeled on 
scientific journals, it called for scientists to write about original 
aspects of their work for the benefit of colleagues and the general 
field in which they worked.33 As a vehicle for exchanging ideas 
and technical information, the journal aimed, as the founder 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 110
Frank Malina outlined, to address the “overtones of secrecy” that 
permeated the arts.34 In contrast to the commercial art journals of 
Art Forum , Art in America , and Arts, which critic David Carrier 
saw as Marxist or post-structuralist, and the historical journals of 
Art Bulletin , Burlington Magazine , and Art History , which were 
extensively academic, Leonardo  was viewed as a more objective 
and wide-ranging account of the contemporary world.35 Sharing 
the sentiment of Franke and others, Leonardo  was to disseminate 
knowledge, as one of its editors described, in a clear, rational, and 
precise way so as to “dispel mystery rather than create it.”36
Apart from Leonardo , there were a number of major publications 
devoted to computer art. Available after the first wave of interest in 
the late 1960s, the seminal texts included Franke’s book Computer 
Graphics—Computer Art  (1971) and Jasia Reichardt’s book The 
Computer in Art  (1971). The period also witnessed an increased 
prevalence of articles devoted to computer art across several different 
disciplines, appearing frequently in science, mathematics, engineering, 
and computer graphics journals. A common presumption which 
persists today is that computer art lacks a significant discourse. This 
presupposition is incorrect. Because of its interdisciplinary appeal, 
there was extensive literature on the subject, more so than the avant-
garde movements of the day.
Perhaps the most significant reason for the resurgence of 
computer art was that the artist, avoiding the negative effects of 
collaboration, began learning computer programming. This resulted 
in a shift away from the dominant position held by scientists and 
technologists. As previously discussed, the original computer art 
exhibitions were made up entirely of scientists. When the major 
international exhibition Cybernetic Serendipity  was held, there 
were very few trained artists engaging with the computer. As the 
curator noted, “only three artists [had] actually produced computer 
graphics, while the rest to date had been made by scientists.”37 In 
the 1970s, scientists were no longer the primary practitioners, and 
artists were no longer dependent on their expertise. These artists, 
reluctant to commit to a broad idea of a technology-based art, which 
characterized artists from the Art and Technology movement, sought 
to consign themselves to the narrower field of computing. While 
the integrated media experiments of the past had been technically 
problematic, the computer, which was now more readily available, 
became a much more viable instrument for experimentation. Artists 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 111
were now searching for knowledge and skill in diverse disciplines.
In the 1970s, as Dietrich wrote, a “growing breed of technological 
artists with hybrid capabilities started to appear.”38 According 
to Duane Palyka, the computer artist must be one that can cope 
with the dualities of two fields. The artist must possess a “flexible 
enough identity to accept the interflow of ideas from one discipline 
to another” and be able “to pursue what is interesting in spite of the 
labels that have been attached to it.”39 By the early 1970s, the artist-
programmer began to materialize. Manfred Mohr proudly declared 
that he was self-taught in computer science, Edward Zajec learned 
programming and taught it to artists, and Duane Palyka held 
degrees in both fine arts and mathematics. The artist-programmer 
duality was central to the Leonardo mythology and the dream 
that the computer artist was an agent of cultural conciliation. 
As Reichardt announced in 1974, “The bridges between art and 
science are finally only built by those who embody something of 
the two disciplines.”40
In contrast to the declining Art and Technology movement, 
computer art expanded. By 1975, Computers and People  (formerly 
Computers and Automation ) featured the work of 41 artists from 
11 countries in its annual exposition.41 There was also the 1975 
NCC Art Exhibition of computer art, which was the largest to 
date. By 1978, there were 30 times more computer art practitioners 
than a decade earlier. Once exhibited in isolation and within 
modest settings, computer art began to be shown in larger venues. 
A considerable portion of the venues included universities and 
polytechnic institutes that had recently incorporated computer 
science within its engineering departments. Subsequently, there 
was an expansion of computer courses including, for the first time, 
computer art classes.
A significant reason for the new artist paradigm was increased 
emphasis on computer literacy in universities and colleges. In 
fact, many of the new audiences for computer art were made up 
of students studying computer science. This pedagogy was part of 
the new agenda for liberal arts that had begun to institutionalize 
technological literacy in the United States. This included general 
courses plus research projects on the computer and its systems. As 
part of this general move toward technological literacy, computer 
art had been added to the curriculum at the major state universities. 
The shift toward this demographic meant that computer artists were 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 112
no longer an elitist group of technologists, and the new access and 
availability of computers through educational institutions meant an 
end to computer art being produced in military laboratories.
Perhaps what lifted computer art’s profile and prevented it from 
meeting the same fate as the Art and Technology movement was the 
advent of the graphics industry. While many early commentators 
believed visual arts was the field most likely to benefit from the 
computer, graphic design proved the most successful. Indeed, 
since its inception, the computer art exhibition has presided over 
a mix of utility and artistic endeavor. Franke’s 1971 publication 
Computer Graphic—Computer Art  is an early testament to the 
computer/graphic art nexus. Often the graphics community was 
indistinguishable from the computer art community. In the early 
1970s, there were a number of conferences and symposiums that 
situated computer graphics as an important yet somewhat modest 
field within computer science. In the 1970s, the discipline of 
computer graphics grew substantially with a proliferation of journals 
and foundational textbooks. In 1973, the inaugural SIGGRAPH 
(Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics) conference was 
held in Boulder, Colorado. SIGGRAPH would become a major 
exposition and trade show for graphics research and, significantly, 
a crucial popularizer of computer art, especially in the 1980s when 
an exhibition component was added to the annual conference.
With universities and research laboratories working toward 
solving fundamental problems facing the production of digital 
images, the application for computer graphics widened considerably. 
In the United States, these facilities included Bell Labs, University 
of Utah, New York Institute of Technology, MIT, and others. The 
industry grew significantly—by the late 1970s, the entire value of 
all of the computer graphics systems, such as hardware and services, 
would reach a billion dollars in the United States. In the early 
1970s, institutions were interested in converting much of this early 
work into commercially marketable applications. Drafting, remote 
sensing, military simulation, medical imaging, and business graphics 
were all possible fields in which computer graphics could be utilized. 
The entertainment industry would also embrace computer graphics 
and its capabilities, with computer graphics and animation being 
introduced to mass audiences through the world of television and 
computer games. The video game industry, still then in its infancy, 
had a future that appeared assured once digital technology fully 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 113
infiltrated the once analog arcade. Many of these developments 
were the result of pioneering artists such as John Whitney and 
Charles Csuri who developed various animation systems. One 
result was the formation in the 1970s of a number of animation and 
special effects houses, which serviced Hollywood film companies 
eager to incorporate the latest photo-realistic computer imagery in 
film. By the late 1970s, computer-generated imagery was becoming 
increasingly ubiquitous on television, print, and film.
With the increased enculturation of the computer and its imagery, 
artists felt a new congeniality toward the computer. On a practical 
level, artists viewed the rise of the computer as another technical 
innovation and saw their use of the computer in the arts as a logical 
extension in a long tradition of using the most advanced techniques 
available. On a sociological level, artists felt it appropriate to make 
use of an increasingly ubiquitous machine. Lillian Schwartz, one of 
the first female artists to use the computer in the production of art, 
reasoned that by disregarding the computer, one would be “ignoring 
a large part of our world today.”42 Likewise, Lloyd Sumner, one 
of the first American-trained artists to employ the computer, felt 
that the computer was the only “proper medium” to express the 
technological world.43 The growing concern to understand the 
new social and cultural realities of the post-industrial society 
through the computational medium enhanced the relevance of 
the computer. In the early 1970s, these new technological realities 
had been reconceptualized by the American sociologist Daniel Bell 
in his highly influential book The Coming of the Post-Industrial 
Society  (1973). Overall, discourse on the societal effect of advanced 
technology was on the increase. The futurologist Alvin Toffler 
warned in his book Future Shock  (1970) that the accelerative 
nature of technological change required one to understand the 
latent potential of the future. Consequently, technological futurism 
and forecasting, which was a functional pursuit of the computer, 
became instinctive within computer culture. These futurological 
narratives eventually surfaced in computer art discourse. 
Commentators and artists increasingly forecasted the outcomes of 
computers in art. Futurology and narratives of progress became key 
elements in computer art’s claim to be an innovative and original 
art form. Much of the writing was caught up in the fallacy that new 
technological inventions would bring about a complete revolution 
for the good; in this case, the computer would provide democratizing 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 114
and unifying elements within art. While the futurology within 
computer art discourse was often exaggerated, there were also 
some remarkably accurate prophesies made by commentators and 
artists. Some prognostications did not eventuate, as seen in two of 
these statements by Franke: “At the very least, art students will in 
[the] future be taught programming as a matter of routine.”44 Again 
from Franke: “Most likely the painters and sculptors esteemed 
today will nearly have been forgotten, and instead the appearance 
of electronic media will be hailed as the most significant turn in 
the history of art.”45 Three decades have passed and the hegemony 
of traditional media is still in place and digital artists still struggle 
for acceptance. In contrast, however, there are countless examples 
where predictions have been correct, with Grace Hertlein and Jasia 
Reichardt being particularly prophetic.46
Another factor that made computing more palatable for the artist 
was the revision and reshaping of scientific ideas by new counter 
cultural forces. The cultural historian Charlie Gere recognized 
the emergence of a “second order” cybernetics that articulated a 
“new and positive conception of technology.”47 Beyond the social 
theorists, such as McLuhan, and the avant-garde artists, such as 
Cage, the most significant factor in this shift was the formation of a 
technologically minded counterculture. California, the seat of West 
Coast counterculture, became home to the burgeoning Silicon Valley, 
the geographic area that drew together companies and individuals 
involved in computing research and development. This environment 
allowed for the melding of the original counter-cultured desire for 
experimentation and an alternative lifestyle that emanated from San 
Francisco with the technology-oriented entrepreneurial capitalism 
of Silicon Valley’s technocracy. Within this environment, scientific 
theories such as cybernetics were infused and reinvigorated by 
the holistic and ecological countercultural thinking found in 
Steward Brand’s Whole Earth Project. The engineering paradigms 
that characterized 1940s and 1950s cybernetics gave way to the 
interconnectedness of nature and the relation between living beings 
and the ecosystem. Cold War technologies would be “stripped” of 
their militaristic aura and reimagined under a type of cybernetic 
idealism in which a new generation of technology would be 
thoughtfully applied for the betterment of society.48
Another important phenomenon to emerge from the 1970s 
countercultural computing world was the “hacker.” The hacker 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 115
culture developed from the large university laboratories, where 
young men intrigued by the possibilities of computing developed 
an almost hermetic devotion to the computer. Many hackers, who 
were from a long American tradition of electronic hobbyists and 
tinkerers, were fascinated by the possibility and challenge of building 
a digital computer. The hacker is a significant shift away from the 
priesthood of the machine that characterized the technicians and 
programmers from the 1950s and early 1960s. While still devoted 
to the computer, the hacker was seduced by the power and elegance 
of programming and the ability to personally build one’s own 
computer system. Self-reliance, commitment to programming, and 
an adoration of the computer also typified the new breed of artist-
programmer. With a growing mythology surrounding the hacker, 
artist-programmers began to formulate their own distinct cult 
around a commitment and devotion to the computer. Jean-Pierre 
Hébert was an artist who personified the hacker type. After working 
as programming engineer in 1959 for IBM’s new operation in Paris, 
he began thinking about the possibilities of making art with the 
computer. Alone and completely divorced from the art world, he 
built an image-generating system on Hewlett Packard’s earliest 
personal computers. For a decade he experimented in isolation 
with different computational machines, devices, and programming 
languages, building a practice that would see him become one of 
the most prolific computer artists and a founding member of the 
Algorists (see Chapter 4 for more on Hébert).
Beyond the appearance of the trained artist, the most invigorating 
factor within the computer art project was the influx of female 
artists, writers, and critics. In the 1970s and beyond, women became 
primary agents in the theorization and criticism of computer art. 
Jasia Reichardt’s publications’ The Computer in Art  (1971) and 
Cybernetics, Art and Ideas  (1971) marked her as the most astute 
commentator on the computer art phenomenon. This is besides her 
curatorial work on the landmark Cybernetic Serendipity , which 
initiated much of the worldwide interest in computer art. Other 
female computer artists in the 1970s became prolific writers as well. 
Grace Hertlein wrote extensively on computer art for the journal 
Computers and Automation , and Ruth Leavitt gave voice to a range 
of computer artists in her seminal publication Computer and Artist  
(1976). In addition, the visionary works and writings of Lillian 
Schwartz, Vera Molnar, and Colette Bangert shaped computer art 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 116
discourse. In the following decade, women would also take the key 
role in criticism through the work of Cynthia Goodman, Margot 
Lovejoy, Patric Prince, and Anne M. Spalter; and there emerged an 
ever-increasing group of successful computer-based female artists.49 
Darcy Gerbarg and Copper Giloth organized the first art exhibitions 
in conjunction with the SIGGRAPH conference. Curated by 
Gerbarg, the inaugural 1981 exhibition included a raft of pioneering 
female artists, including Lillian Schwartz, Joan Truckenbrod, Ruth 
Leavitt, Copper Giloth, and Colette Bangert. Giloth would chair 
the following two annual SIGGRAPH exhibitions, including 1983’s 
highly successful “Exhibition of Computer Art” international show.
Many have noted the gender politics of twentieth-century 
science and technology, especially in engineering that is traditionally 
associated with men and masculinist ideology. Likewise, computer 
culture, which emerged from engineering and militaristic domains, 
privileged masculinity. Computer programming, which interestingly 
had been the domain of women before and during the war, 
became increasingly male-orientated in the 1950s as its prestige 
as a challenging and intellectual endeavor grew. Women had been 
seminal in the development of the electronic computer. Even prior 
to World War II, women were responsible for manually calculating 
complex firing tables required for ballistic weaponry—they were 
in effect “human computers.” By the time trained female artists 
entered the field in the late 1960s, the terrain of computing was 
becoming increasingly masculine. Since the 1940s, programming 
had been largely a female occupation. Mimicking the mechanical 
operation of the telephone switchboard, the programmer possessed 
the long-standing gendered overtones of clerical work. The male 
engineer, conversely, was the “planner” whose role was deemed more 
analytical. In the professional hierarchy, the male was associated 
with technical mastery and intellectual analysis, while the female 
role of programmer was associated with rudimentary manual 
labor, even if the business of programming was a highly demanding 
ability, requiring various creative and analytical skills. In the late 
1960s, however, programming would become stereotypically a 
masculine endeavor, making the profession, as historian Nathan 
Ensmenger writes, “inhospitable to all but the most adventurous 
and unconventional women.”50
It seems surprising in the face of the counterculture’s technophobia 
and the feminist critique of industrialization that female artists 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 117
were able to move into the masculine world of computing with 
relative ease. When Lillian Schwartz made the decision in 1968 
to employ computers to create art, she was required to enter a 
field with arguably the strongest masculine culture—engineering. 
Therefore, we expect Schwartz’s experience would have been a 
negative one, reflecting the institutionalized sexism that engineering 
was notorious for. Yet we find the opposite to be the case. The artist 
found early computing to be devoid of gender bias. Compared to 
the patriarchal power structure that defined the mainstream art 
world, these women found the emergent field of computing to 
be relatively open. In the formative years, social norms proved to 
be more fluid and gender barriers remained unconstructed, even 
though computing would masculinize soon after.51
While there were exceptions, women tended to not be excluded 
as they had been in the field of engineering. Lillian Schwartz was 
invited to work at Bell Labs and stayed, forging a celebrated career. 
For Schwartz, there were no gender issues. For the artist, the shift was 
relatively straightforward because she had always worked with the 
latest technologies, and she had no concern over how her computer 
work would be received because her pre-computer art was already 
successful. Schwartz was not actively seeking equal rights within a 
male domain. This corresponds with Cynthia Rubin’s account of 
her transition to computer-based art. Beyond the aesthetic flexibility 
of the computer, Rubin remained in the computer art field because 
it was open. According to Rubin, “anyone who had a new idea 
was welcomed” as gender, race, and position within the computer 
community were not a central concern.52
Historically, the gender shift parallels the increased participation 
of women in the engineering and computing fields in the 1970s. 
Another facilitating factor was the Women’s Movement and the 
resulting influx of women into the visual arts. Moreover, other 
creative fields once dominated by men were witnessing a shift; for 
example, at the same time a generation of female science fiction 
writers came to prominence.53 For many feminist artists, painting 
was considered too masculinist or at least too closely associated 
with an overt masculinist history of Western art. Hence they were 
particularly attracted to non-mainstream mediums, which they 
felt were suited to feminist subject matter, such as textiles and 
performance. On the other hand, Spalter suggested that females 
were attracted to the computer for similar reasons, because “unlike  
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 118
traditional fine art media, [the computer] does not have a history of 
primarily male practitioners.”54 While this is true, feminist themes 
are not common among female computer artists (unlike textiles, 
performance, video, and photography), and male scientists and 
technologists did dominate computer art production in the 1960s (as 
would be expected given science and engineering’s long masculine 
bias). It appears that computer art was such a new medium that 
male practitioners were yet to construct a history that favored 
them. In addition, the computer itself appeared to be equally 
seductive to both genders. After all, some of the most insightful and 
passionate writings on mechanical calculation have been made by 
the nineteenth-century mathematician Augusta Ada King, Countess 
of Lovelace. In the computer art world, gender issues in the 1970s 
seemed to be eclipsed by the absorption in and enthrallment of the 
computer’s innate potential. However, new research suggests that 
artists were experimenting with gender issues in the early 1970s.55
Even though there were female computer artists who raised 
gender issues in their work, it was not as prevalent a theme as it 
was in video and performance art. On the whole, there was little 
overt polemics involved in the use of the computer by women 
in the early 1970s. This contrasts with artists using video which 
became, as Margot Lovejoy described, an “alternative, progressive, 
and flexible medium for expressing their political and cultural 
objectives.”56 Like their male counterparts, female computer artists 
were largely devoted to the potential of the computer and its 
processes, rather than its potential as a political tool. Nevertheless, 
female artists overcame the fallacy that computer technology 
was inherently masculine. It became clear that computers did not 
embody masculinity; rather the medium had in the early years of 
computer art been culturally constructed as male preserve.
The movement of trained artists into the field meant that computer 
art evolved more humanist sensibilities. Intuition, subjectivity, and 
poetics began to replace the omnipresent rhetoric of abstraction 
and the overwhelming instrumental view of a depersonalized art. 
In the late 1960s, pioneering computer artists such as the Brazilian 
Waldemar Cordeiro and the American Lloyd Sumner pursued overt 
humanist themes. They were the first artists to bring human emotions 
into what Benthall described as the “cold and cerebral world” 
of computing.57 Lloyd Sumner was the first to use the computer 
solely for aesthetic means, and his publication Computer Art and 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 119
Human Response  (1968) was the first text devoted entirely to an 
individual computer art practice. He was also the first artist to sell 
substantial amounts of his work. In fact, in 1971 he funded much 
of his famous round-the-world bike expedition by selling computer 
artworks and lecturing on the subject.58 Sumner’s travel memoir, 
The Long Ride  (1978), which records the artist selling and making 
computer artworks to finance the next leg of his journey, became 
legendary amongst adventure cyclists. Even with his success—he 
was exhibited in Cybernetic Serendipity —he does not feature in key 
histories of digital art.
Independent of any research program, Sumner started producing 
computer-generated drawings in 1964. Although he studied art 
at the University of Virginia, it should be noted that his primary 
study was engineering. It was while working at a part-time job 
at the campus computer science center that Sumner first came in 
contact with computing. His dual art and engineering background 
equipped him to realize the potential of the machine as a mechanical 
aid in art making. Each drawing was fully preconceived, with 
Sumner sketching out the drawing by hand before programming 
the computer. A significant portion of his computer-generated art 
was completed in 1967 when he was an artist-in-residence at the 
University of Virginia. Although many of his computer drawings 
were relatively simple geometric linear designs, some were subtle 
designs, emitting interesting visual effects. They were visually 
descriptive in form and title, which made them popular to a 
traditional art public who thought the usual abstract representation 
lacked human expression. So popular was this new art form that 
at an exhibition at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts his work 
sold out in the first day, which was highly unusual for a computer 
art exhibition. Encouraged by this, Sumner attempted to make a 
career out of computer art by marketing his work under the title 
Computer Creations. Benthall remarked that Sumner was one of 
the few computer artists who actually made a “living from their 
work.”59
Following the conventional model, Sumner’s book begins with 
a simple description of the computational process, but then moves 
to a poetic and lyrical style, which contrasts with the objective and 
goal-orientated writing of previous technologists. However, Sumner 
was acutely aware of the suspicion with which the orthodox art 
world regarded what was at the time a foreign and extraneous 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 120
device. Sumner opened his book with a plea to the reader not to 
prejudge his art because of its mode of construction. Each image 
is accompanied by a short, often rudimentary musing on the work 
and its meaning. Overall, it is a highly romantic text. The humanist 
passages mix the personal and highly spiritual with the abstract 
and mechanical. Ideas of love, hate, and beauty are interwoven 
with science, space travel, and information theory. There is an 
overt optimism expressed toward technology. The computer and 
its peripheral devices become central figures in the art form. Works 
such as The Magnificent Machine  are devoted to the intrigue of 
all machines. Sumner, humanizing and personifying the computer, 
dedicates his book: “To my good friends the Burroughs B5500 and 
the Calcomp 565.”60 Starting a trend that many computer artists 
followed, Sumner is photographed with his computer (Figure 3.1). 
The sociologist and psychologist Sherry Turkle had begun to 
notice how engrossing the computational medium can become for 
users, so much so that the interaction with the machine “offers 
the illusion of companionship.”61 Computer artists such as Grace 
Hertlein, who invoked the idea of the “joyous machine,” followed 
FIGURE 3.1  Lloyd Sumner generating computer art with a Burroughs 
B5500 computer and Calcomp 565 plotter, ca. 1968. University of Virginia. 
Courtesy of Jean Sumner.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 121
the highly reflective relationship that Sumner and others entered 
into.62 This complete adoration of the digital machine, an element 
not present among the Art and Technology artists, was something 
not seen since the writings of nineteenth-century photographer 
Peter Henry Emerson and William Henry Fox Talbot, who both 
wrote evocatively about the camera’s almost magical powers of 
representation.
Like much of the computer art of the 1960s, Sumner’s work 
was a combination of geometric abstract figures. Intuitively Yours  
(Figure 3.2), a basic abstract geometric pattern that creates a subtle 
moiré effect, illustrates the artist’s appeal to intuition. Although the 
computer generated the images, Sumner reminded the viewer that 
the conception and perception of the image was fully human. While 
Sumner’s drawings are a combination of abstract patterns and 
geometric spatial forms, many express the quality of organic shape 
and movement. These drawings, which he called “Sumnergrams,” 
were defined as smooth curves and the recursion of flowing lines 
fashioned into closed loops. With this process, Sumner produced 
the first self-portrait generated by a computer (Figure 3.3), creating 
in the process an early example of a digital avatar.
FIGURE 3.2  Lloyd Sumner, Intuitively Yours,  ca. 1968. Courtesy of Jean 
Sumner.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 122
Apart from his humanistic approach, Sumner began the trend 
away from hard-edge geometric abstraction. In the 1970s a variety of 
personal expression developed among the new artist-programmers. 
The emphasis began to shift from the will to discover new aesthetic 
laws to the representation of natural forms and structures. For 
the artists, inspiration increasingly came from outside rather than 
inside the world of computing. Increasingly, too, traditional genres 
were becoming popular.
While much of the computer art of the 1960s evoked an organic 
quality through the generation of symmetrical geometric figures, 
the artists of the 1970s were looking to redefine their relationship 
to nature through the landscape motif. Early computer art was 
dominated by geometric abstraction, and technologists and artists 
were quick to trace their hard-edge, linear aesthetic back to early 
abstract modernist movements, such as constructivism. Artists 
were crucial in shifting computer art away from the cool rhetoric 
of mechanical abstraction—toward styles informed by the organic 
and the human. For example, in the early 1970s, Grace Hertlein 
completed the naturalistic work The Field  (Figure 3.4), which 
employed traditional drawing mediums such as paper, pens, and inks FIGURE 3.3  Lloyd Sumner, Self-Portrait,  ca. 1968. Courtesy of Jean 
Sumner.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 123
to produce more biological effects. Artists deliberately subverted 
the precision and symmetry of the computer, pushing their practice 
toward inexactness and disorder. Bangert, who sought to humanize 
the computer, produced landscapes with her husband that simulated 
expressionistic strokes of the human hand. Large Landscape: Ochre 
and Black  (Figure 3.5) simulated chaotic patterns through random FIGURE 3.4  Grace C. Hertlein, The Field,  1970. Paper, ink, Rapido -
graph brushes and pens. IBM 1620 and Calcomp plotter. Courtesy of the 
artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 124
generators. The symmetry and precision that gave 1960s computer 
art a mechanistic appearance shifted toward inexactness and 
disorder, as the artist worked against the accuracy of the computer. 
This trend toward mimicry of the artist’s hand or the engagement of 
traditional genres was not admired by critic John Canaday, however. 
Though he believed that the Bangerts’ computer art was “appealing” 
in its “sensitivity,” the critic believed that these approximations of 
the artist’s hands were facile and not worth the effort involved.63 FIGURE 3.5  CS & CJ Bangert, Large Landscape: Ochre and Black,  
1970. Ink on paper. © Spencer Museum of Art, the University of Kansas. 
Gift of Colette Stuebe Bangert and Charles Jeffries Bangert, 1999.0232.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 125
“But if there is to be such a thing as computer art,” the critic asserts, 
“surely it must start with a recognition of the computer’s potential 
for new expressions rather than with the premise that it can be 
taught old ones.”64 Exactitude for creating linear complexity was 
for Canaday the real virtue of the digital machine; simulation was 
not. For other critics, the more humanist-inspired work, though a 
move away from cool, mechanical-like abstraction of the early years, 
still possessed the mark of the machine. The artist was perceived as 
complicit in a type of mechanical subterfuge.
Although the 1970s is often viewed as an unremarkable decade 
in computer art history, there is evidence to suggest that artists 
of this period provided the crucial ideas, such as generativity, 
the algorithmic, and heuristic exploration, that became key in 
the coming decade. Although their practices varied, artists such 
as Manfred Mohr, Harold Cohen, and Vera Molnar developed 
methods that were important for the transition between the early 
1960s computer art paradigm of revealing art as an abstraction 
and the 1980s artist-programmer paradigm of creating and then 
exploring an open-ended art-making system.
While traditional art genres such as landscape and self-portraiture 
began to surface in 1970s computer art, they remained in the 
minority. Motifs and metaphors derived from nature only became 
widespread in the 1980s. Like the 1960s, geometric abstraction 
dominated in the 1970s. The rational management of the art-
making process and the impulse for reduction remained a governing 
principle amongst artists. In the 1970s, there was no retreat from 
formalization and the mathematization of art. In some quarters, the 
demystifying critique of art through empirical method remained a 
viable project. Following the work of psychologist Michael Apter, 
theorists such as Franke were still advocating the cybernetics 
approach to art.65 Franke believed that cybernetics would “bring an 
end to the era of sophistry in the discussion of art.”66 For Franke, a 
science of aesthetics still remained a key project:
A science of aesthetics is making itself evident, which contradicts 
some important traditionally accepted concepts of art. As in the 
natural sciences, the science of aesthetics allows only statements that 
can be analysed logically and then be verified to determine if they 
meet the truth of facts. Only in this way can one escape from the 
morass of verbal rhetoric so much of today’s hypothesizing on art.67
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 126
While experimental aesthetics was seen as the new theory that 
would make art a science, new interest in artificial creativity 
renewed the belief that the computer could “amplify or supersede” 
the artist.68 As Hiroshi Kawano announced in 1975, “logical 
activity” is the essence of art, while reason is the “ raison d’etre  of 
computer art.”69 Even the Bangerts, who were involved in more 
subjective themes, were attracted to the “rational approach to art” 
as a way to understand and clarify previous and current visual 
concepts.70 Also, in an attempt to “seek a concrete answer” to the 
mysteries of aesthetic appreciation, Vera Molnar wanted to work 
in a consciously empirical way.71 In the tradition of Max Bense, 
Molnar believed that the “underlying principles for giving aesthetic 
satisfaction to viewers … can be found.”72 The human sciences 
were for Molnar the key to solving the riddle of art’s aesthetic 
reception. New experimental aesthetics coupled with advances in 
perception psychology represented the ideal conceptual tool to 
generate “good pictures.”73 Manfred Mohr also recognized the 
fundamental advantage of logical, precise, and objective methods. 
As Mohr suggested, programming the logical features of art forced 
a “maniacal precision” onto the artist,74 which resulted in a “clearer 
image of the creator’s thinking and intentions.”75 For Mohr, the 
forced objectivity was an important way to deny all modes of 
artistic subjectivity.
Rejecting the metaphysical and speculative aspect of image 
creation for the technological moment, Mohr recognized part of 
his project was breaking down the mystic barriers of the artistic 
process. Mohr perceived that a general shift was occurring in the arts 
away from “uncontrollable metaphysics to a systematic and logical 
constructivism.”76 Likewise, Cordeiro believed that the skillful 
utilization of the computer had the great value of “demystifying 
traditional art and contributing toward the analysis of mental 
processes in artistic activity.”77 Nevertheless, Mohr wanted to 
distance himself from the mathematics project by stressing that 
his art was not about the system of logic, but rather the “visual 
invention which results from it.”78 Mohr stated that he was “not 
trying to illustrate cold mathematics, but a vital philosophy.”79
The rational treatment of art is most apparent in the work of 
Harold Cohen. For many in the sciences, his work has become 
an important model of the art-making process. Cohen’s practice 
paralleled the rise of interdisciplinary study into the subject of 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 127
creativity. In fact, Cohen’s work is a prime illustrative example of 
this and related fields such as artificial intelligence. Although Cohen 
has a unique place in the scientific study of artificial creativity, the 
artist’s placement in the history of computer art is problematic. He 
held in disdain the computer art community and its conception 
of “computer art,” what he described as “those interminable 
geometrical figures.”80 Working in relative isolation from the 
computer art community, he preferred the difficult and relatively 
new field of artificial intelligence. He was the first artist to work 
with artificial intelligence paradigms in an extensive way. It was 
through his tour de force , the autonomous programmed robotic 
drawing machine AARON (Figure 3.6) that he became the most 
widely regarded artist working with computers. Cohen found great 
FIGURE 3.6  Harold Cohen, Stedelijk Museum installation, Amsterdam, 
1977. Showing the computer-driven “turtle” in action and completed large 
and small drawings on the gallery walls. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 128
success in the 1980s, gaining entrance into art periodicals and daily 
newspapers, such as Art in America  and the New York Times , a 
feat other computer artists never achieved. Beyond the relatively 
autonomous scientific discourse surrounding his work, Cohen has 
written extensively on his work, its meaning, technical aspects, and 
significance.
Like many of the artist-programmers, Cohen turned his back on a 
highly successful career as a painter to be involved in the difficult and 
unforgiving area of computing. After moving to California, which 
had become the center for computing research and development, 
Cohen, with much difficulty, taught himself how to program. From 
that time on, programming exerted a curious allure over the artist. 
It was, as he once stated, a “genuine psychedelic experience.”81 The 
artist was surprised at how programming extended one’s mental 
capability, allowing one to develop and shape dormant mental 
faculties. Independently of the artificial intelligence community, 
Cohen began to appreciate how these computer programs were 
like human cognition. If art making was in simple terms analogous 
to a series of decisions—the powerful if-then-else  statement in 
programming—then one could employ these conditional statements 
to select and control the action of a program. This in turn could 
autonomously create an art object. Characterizing the human art-
making process as a continuous changing pattern of decisions based 
on the artist’s awareness of the work in progress, Cohen sought 
to program such artistic behavior into a computer model. Though 
artists, critics, and theorists speculated on the essence of art-
making, there was no means of testing their theories. For Cohen, 
the computer could permit a rigorous test of ideas about art-
making which may lead to knowledge on the process itself. Similar 
to Bense’s abstract aesthetics, Cohen’s project was a further attempt 
to rationalize and model human creative faculties in the hope of 
generating new knowledge.
Unlike other artists involved with computers in the 1970s who 
viewed the computer as a new medium for fine art production, 
Cohen envisaged the computer as a tool to explore and refine 
his ideas about the nature of visual representation. However, 
building a program that investigated art-making behavior proved 
difficult. It took a number of years before Cohen found the right 
research environment and technical knowledge required for such 
a speculative project. Through Edward Feigenbaum, a pioneer of 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 129
artificial intelligence at Stanford University, Cohen gained access to 
the necessary resources. According to McCorduck, Cohen applied to 
the National Foundation for a grant and was turned down. As one 
of the reviewers declared: “How can Professor Cohen hope to learn 
Fortran? He’s an artist.”82 His entrance into the world of artificial 
intelligence was initially straightforward, as he had independently 
arrived at the foundational tenet, the underlying supposition shared 
by many scientists in artificial intelligence: because the computer 
is a general-purpose manipulator of symbols, it can be viewed as 
functionally equivalent to the brain.
Cohen’s seminal essay “Parallel to Perception: Some Notes 
on the Problem of Machine-Generated Art” (1973) outlined his 
research for the coming decade. Reading like a manifesto, the 
paper identified contemporary computer art, which he called a 
“strange manifestation,” as preoccupied with the “predetermined 
transformations” of existing image data. The emphasis was 
on either generating beautiful and interesting patterns from 
mathematical functions or enlisting transformative functions in the 
metamorphosis of existing imagery. For Cohen, simply formulating 
interesting patterns had no claim to art. “The real power, the real 
magic,” he exclaimed, rested “not in the making of images, but in the 
conjuring of meaning.”83 Cohen was not attracted so much to the 
computer’s celebrated precision, remarkable versatility, or constant 
capacity for work, but more to its power to execute functions that 
parallel those of the mind. Reminiscent of the camera, the computer 
had become for Cohen democratized: anybody with the appropriate 
device could access image-making. For Cohen, the computer was 
not appreciated for its greatest capacities. It was being used like 
a camera—merely as a tool for representation. This “particular 
kind of usage,” Cohen believed, was the reason why computer art 
was not considered art. Making the computer serve as a “picture-
processor” was the “antithesis of autonomy,” and autonomy was 
the true calling of the computer.84
The picture-processing paradigm in computer art was limited 
to a production-line kind of procedure: an image is fed in, then 
manipulated or transformed, and finally processed out. For Cohen, 
this routine lacked the feedback that was part of the human art-
making process. That natural feedback system was engaged when 
the artist encountered the perceptual world and made decisions on 
the basis of precepts. Any feedback evident in the current computer 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 130
art process was via the human user, which made it like any other 
traditional tool. What Cohen suggested was that rather than giving 
the machine initial digital image data or mathematical functions 
in advance or when the program needed it, the program could 
generate the material itself. Without any preliminary input the 
program would need to be embedded with a behavioral function 
that would provide the necessary feedback mechanisms within 
its own structure. The idea of the machine being loaded with 
a program, executing the program then stopping in one discrete 
event did not resemble human behavior for Cohen. To have any 
real equivalence, Cohen envisaged a machine “equipped with an 
archival memory, running a self-modifying program not once, 
but hundreds or even thousands of times, and modifying future 
performance on the basis of past performance.”85 This innovative 
idea meant that the initial input had little significance for the final 
outcome—the initial parameters having the same relationship to 
the stylistic inclinations of the artist’s first teacher. The internal 
feedback mechanism in the program would create its own paths, 
conduct its own investigations and modify its own behavior on the 
basis of the response it generates. This made Cohen’s project unlike 
any other computer art practice.86
The key point of “Parallel to Perception” was Cohen’s 
suggestion that the “computer was capable of autonomous art-
making behavior, capable of initiating its own material to act 
upon—far beyond so-called computer art where the machine only 
transformed material presented to it.”87 It had implications for the 
Western delusion of “real creativity” and “originality,” McCorduck 
suggested, which were traditionally seen as a priori  in the mind of 
the genius artist.88 Cohen seemed to be hinting that if one deduced 
art-making principles and externalized these in the form of a 
program, this program could evolve much like the human artist. 
Like the stance of previous scientists and technologists, this was an 
affront to humanism and its artistic tradition.
To embody this new understanding on visual representation, 
Cohen developed the program AARON, which would later become 
the oldest continuously developed program in computer history. With 
AARON, Cohen was attempting to discover the nature of the creative 
act by constructing a counterpart to human cognitive processes 
that underlie the making of visual images. AARON captured the 
essence of the artist’s hand through the robotically drawn line, 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 131
which was “vital if the viewer was to believe that the marks were 
the product of a system essentially like human cognition.”89 Unlike 
previous computer art, there was no preplanning of drawn lines 
(Figure 3.7). AARON would make a series of marks dependent on 
a feedback mode. Essentially, the interaction of cognitive primitives 
devised by Cohen produced the drawings. AARON possessed all of 
the knowledge and understanding it needed to complete a picture. 
Possessing a memory of its previous position, the program knew 
where it was and where it needed to go. AARON ended a picture 
when it had satisfied the parameters of extending graphic elements 
throughout the picture space. This is one continuing difference 
between AARON and other computer art programs: AARON had 
an awareness of where it was located and what remained to be 
completed.
Cohen’s early “machine-generated art,” as he called it, was first 
introduced to the art community in 1972 at the Los Angeles County 
Museum of Art. Rather than responding to the artistic idea, the 
audience was captivated by the physical mechanical device. They 
FIGURE 3.7  Harold Cohen, Drawings from the San Francisco Museum of 
Modern Art, 1979. Generated by the program AARON. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 132
attentively watched the computer as it produced the drawing. Many 
believed the machine possessed sentience. When the pen paused, 
people would believe that the machine was “thinking of what to 
do next.”90 The audience relished in what Turkle described as the 
computer’s sense of aliveness.91 When the pen moved to the other 
side of the paper, they believed that it was to “balance what it had 
done on the other side.”92 When Cohen revealed that the program 
was searching for some space to continue the drawing, the public 
was suitably chagrined by this technical response. Cohen reported 
that it was hard for the audience not to “anthropomorphise the 
machine’s activities.”93 However, he always insisted that his art was 
not about the spectacle of the mechanical device and that he had 
no great interest in machines and their peripheral devices.94 He 
believed that the difference between drawing by hand and drawing 
by means of a mechanical device was essentially trivial. The 
audience needed to be reminded of the programming process—that 
the machine’s identity that animated the drawing process resided in 
the knowledge that had been extracted and externalized from the 
artist’s mind. As if trying to counter the power of the machine or the 
frequent criticism that computer artists merely push a button and 
art comes out, Cohen vigorously announced: “ I give the machine its 
identity. It is doing what I have in mind.”95
Nevertheless, part of computer art’s great public appeal was 
watching a machine complete human activity. Whether in the 
form of Cohen’s robotic drawing system AARON (Figure 3.6) or 
the self-directed motion of Manfred Mohr’s plotter (Figure 3.8), 
the strange autonomy and animation of the machine was a key 
factor in computer art’s wider public appeal. As outlined in the 
previous chapter, the unforeseen behavior of the computer, what 
theorist Tim Binkley called the “wily computergeist” had also 
become a significant mythology for computer artists. This was 
not a new phenomenon. Machines that bewitched their makers 
and their audiences had a long tradition. Machines that exhibited 
independent control had for centuries evoked wonderment. These 
mechanical marvels known as automata  (from the Greek word 
automatos , acting of one’s own will, self-moving) inspired a whole 
spectrum of emotions: from astonishment at the machine’s lifelike 
motion, to extreme indignation over the Promethean powers 
it seemed to engender. The automaton represented both the 
physical and mental attributes of the human. Automata reached 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 133
the height of popularity in the eighteenth century largely due to 
the lifelike flute player, drummer, and duck built by Jacques de 
Vaucanson, whose creations amazed both the general public and 
privileged elite up until the nineteenth century. The mechanical 
automata emerged with the first clocks in the thirteenth century 
and confirmed for Descartes and other Enlightenment thinkers that 
even the most complicated physical processes of animals and men 
could be explained as intricate clockwork mechanisms. While in 
the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries the face of the FIGURE 3.8  Roswita Mürle, Manfred Mohr, Estarose Wolfson, and un -
known visitors in front of the flatbed plotter. Photos from the opening, 
May 11, 1971. Manfred Mohr— Computer Graphics—Une Esthétique Pro -
grammée,  ARC—Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris 1971. Courtesy 
of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 134
machine was the mysteriously driven clockwork automaton, in the 
twentieth century the computer embodied the artificial wonder of 
mechanical simulation.
However, the will for autogenic creative behavior and strong 
mind/body dualism that emanated from practices such as 
Cohen’s was not the dominant computer art form in the 1970s. 
Many artists wanted to shift away from autogenous art making 
and its hard reductionism and strict intercession toward an 
interventional approach. Sherry Turkle noted that two styles of 
computing programming: one was the “hard” mastery based on 
rational, highly logical, and formalized planning; the second she 
called “soft” mastery, based on the interaction, intuition, and 
evolution of a structured system.96 Cohen exemplified the first, 
the hard programming of artificial intelligence, which sought 
to embody creative behavior in a machine. Many artists were 
developing a more organic method of programming where the 
artist’s creativity worked in collaboration with the computational 
process.
By continually reworking and stabilizing the program, or 
developing additional structures in the open-ended processes, 
many computer artists perceived programming as a process 
in a state of flux. This impulse was not confined to computer 
artists. Artists under the tuition of Sonia Landy Sheridan in the 
“Generative Systems” program at the Art Institute of Chicago were 
creating generative modes without the use of computers. They 
were celebrating artist interaction with open and ever-changing 
systems. For these artists, creation was preceded by successive 
approximations and directed by the intuition of the artist. Although 
such artists still thought in terms of modules and systems, they did 
not preformulate the desired visual characteristics in advance. This 
approach was a significant shift from that of the 1960s when the 
desired instructions were punched onto cards and then fed into 
the computer. Here, the design process took place exclusively in 
the conceptualization, prior to running a program. This resulted in 
“blind” input with no real-time abilities for response after request 
for action. Mechanical plotters were relatively slow compared to 
the processing speed on the computer. A significant breakthrough 
came when display media and the cathode-ray tube appeared. Now 
artists had a display medium that matched the processing speed of 
the computer.
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 135
One such artist to use the more intuitive method of programming 
was Vera Molnar. The French artist had a long history in the 
European New Tendency movement, being one of the co-founders of 
GRAV. In 1968, sometime after the demise of GRAV, Molnar began 
to employ the computer in her work. Prior to using the computer, 
Molnar had developed a system of work in which simple abstract 
geometric pictures were generated by altering the dimensions 
and propositions of a number of elements; what the artist called 
“small probing steps.”97 Once computers became available, her 
programmatic process was easily amendable to mechanization, 
and, importantly for the artist, the computer overcame the physical 
and temporal limitations of her often-laborious manual processes.
Starting with preconceived aesthetic principles in mind, 
Molnar made modifications until an aesthetically appealing design 
emerged. By comparing successive pictures that have undergone 
modification, Molar locates the particular trend that produced the 
most aesthetic result. Because the artist cannot fully predict the 
outcome, the results are often surprising and unfamiliar. “What is 
so thrilling to experience,” the artist recorded, was “not only the 
stepwise approach toward the envisioned goal but also sometimes 
the transformation of an indifferent version into one that I find 
aesthetically appealing.”98
By modifying the parameters as the form developed, the artist was 
able to steer the form toward aesthetic maturity, which was a common 
metaphor in the work of the 1980s computer artist, especially as 
artificial life theories became popular. Working with a program 
entitled RESEAU-TO, Molnar aimed to explore systematically the 
possibilities of a program that visualized, in an exhaustive way, 
all images that could be generated within the particular program. 
While many artists set the parameters or grammar specifying the 
way the algorithm should vary, Molnar elaborated the rules as 
the work developed. The linear process of successive steps gave 
the impression of transforming geometric figures from visual order 
to disorder. Interested in the transformative aspect of the works, the 
series revealed the variation and general trend of modification. No 
form was exhibited in isolation; the relationship within the array 
carried the aesthetic meaning. This serial technique is apparent in 
computer drawings from her artist volume Computer-Picture-Book  
(Figure 3.9) in which concentric squares are displaced and visually 
fractured by changing the mathematical parameters.
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 136
Molnar called her responsive editing process the “conversational 
method.”99 Sharing Molnar’s vision, computer artist Edward Zajec 
believed that the “far-reaching consequence” of computer art was 
not in the art objects themselves, but in the process by which they 
were made. The new aesthetic would “no longer be on form and 
contemplation, but rather on formation and interaction of man 
and the machine.”100 This corresponded to Turkle’s understanding 
of “soft mastery” in which the interactive, conversational, and 
responsive method allowed form to emerge from the programmer’s 
interaction with the medium. It is, as Turkle suggested, “more like a 
conversation than a monologue.”101FIGURE 3.9  Vera Molnar, computer drawings from the artist book 
Computer-Picture-Book,  1974. Generated by the artist’s program RE -
SEAU-TO. Courtesy of the artist.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 137
Molnar brought a diversity and scope to processes, placing a 
greater emphasis on computer-aided art than on the autogenic 
character of the computer in previous computer art. Rather than 
merely setting the machine in motion, she employed the computer 
in different parts of the artistic process, thus effectively displacing 
the machine from the central position of creation.
As a self-governing art maker, the computer was envisaged as a 
“generator” of diverse designs and aesthetic objects. Through the 
machine’s generative capability, the computer could imagine forms 
that were beyond the artist’s mental and productive capacity. For 
visual researcher Béla Julesz, the computer constituted the work of 
thousands of people creating limitless variations, and in doing so 
it spawned ideas that would never have occurred to the individual. 
Robert Mallary also believed that the synergistic use of the computer 
worked best in the context of man–machine interactions in which 
the computer was a tool for augmenting the creative process by 
making available to the artist a multitude of design options that 
would not necessarily arise from a traditional process. Likewise, 
artists began viewing the computer as a device that accelerated and 
extended the processes of thought—a type of visual thinking. The 
computer’s increasing production capabilities allowed the artist to 
become an explorer and analyzer rather than a designer and engineer. 
Hence the aesthetics of navigation emerged as a potent concept in 
future computer art and became crucial to the understanding of new 
media, cyberspace, and gaming in the 1980s and 1990s.
The key feature of computer art’s exploratory process was the 
heuristic search. The Greek word heuriskein  meant to discover. 
Heuristical method had been an important part of problem solving 
in computer science, especially in artificial intelligence research 
that relied on heuristic procedures to provide solutions for systems 
with vast potentiality. Under heuristic programming procedures, 
the computer searches through a number of possible solutions at 
each stage of the program; it evaluates solutions for the stage it is 
working on, chooses a “good” one, and then proceeds to the next 
stage. Essentially, heuristic programming is similar to problem-
solving techniques such as trial and error, which are methods used 
in everyday life. Heuristic bias is most helpful when there is an 
exhaustive sea of possibilities. Although the typical “rule of thumb” 
used in heuristic programs effectively limits a search within a set 
of possibilities, it never guarantees the successes of choosing the 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 138
correct answer. Only a step-by-step systematic or analytic search 
will achieve the desired result. However, the cost of the processing 
time makes it untenable.
For the artist who was not looking for a certain empirical 
result, the method offered the opportunity to guide and control 
the transformation of form in any direction, which meant a certain 
semblance of freedom in a determined system. Molnar and others 
began to use heuristic methodology to navigate the sea of possible 
forms generated by the computer. While previous art systems had 
prefigured conditions, Molnar intuitively elaborated rules, effectively 
evolving the form over time. Molnar’s heuristic model was open-ended 
and did not move toward any particular goal except to produce, as 
she suggested, good pictures. In many ways this method had been 
prefigured by Laposky, whose early electronic abstractions were 
discovered through an open-ended, interactive process in which the 
artist must choose the most aesthetic from a plethora of similar forms.
The computer’s power to generate visual form within a specific 
logical framework evoked for the artist a sense of the limitlessness. 
While in the 1960s the visual range was restricted due to computer 
hardware limitations, with the progress in technology, such as large 
memory and more powerful processing, the potential to produce an 
ever-increasing variety of forms became possible. It meant that the 
computer could in the space of minutes produce exceedingly large 
amounts of visual form from one simple schema. For Mohr, the 
computer was an accelerator for “high-speed visual thinking.”102 
And as it had for Molnar, intuitive aesthetic judgment became a key 
technique in Mohr’s creative process.
A fellow European contemporary of Molnar, Mohr became one 
of the most celebrated computer artists of the 1970s. In terms of 
exhibitions, critical attention, and lasting practice, Mohr is 
undoubtedly one of the most successful computer artists. Paralleling 
the semantic distinctions of Cohen, Mohr spoke of the “generative 
artist” and “generative art” because for him the term “computer art” 
failed to encapsulate the idiomatic form of the medium’s key 
methodology. Proponents of his work also agreed that such a 
“frivolous formula” should not be assigned to Mohr.103 As one of the 
first artistically trained pioneers of the medium, the German-born 
Mohr forged a rigorous and astonishingly consistent practice. His 
aptitude and ability was immediately recognized. In the early 1970s, 
commentators such as Grace Hertlein praised him as a “superior 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 139
computer artist.”104 Fueled by a highly intellectual and scientific 
approach, Mohr’s work had the “confidence of an accomplished 
artist,” said Hertlein, which stood in contrast with the “more 
accidental, less controlled, and less sophisticated work of other 
computer artists.”105 Mohr’s popularity was in part due to the interest 
he generated across disciplines. The science world found his 
thoughtfulness, rationality, and consistency engaging, while the art 
world admired the purity of abstraction and expressive intuition he 
displayed, electing him a member of the American Abstract Artists in 
1997.
Compared with Cohen’s autogenic practice, Mohr and Molnar 
viewed the computer as a tool of enhancement. The computer had 
no shaping purpose itself but only carried out the processing of 
forms—more an extension of “artistic potentialities,” as the critic 
Thomas Kurtz wrote.106 Although the aesthetic result was not 
essentially different from the other artists, what fascinated Mohr 
about the machine was its ability to extend the artist intellectually 
and physically. Mohr believed that human thought could be 
“amplified by machines” and could thus raise our “consciousness 
to a higher level of comprehension.”107 Importantly, this extension 
occurred both intellectually and visually, making the computer a 
legitimate medium in both scientific and artistic realms. For Mohr, 
aesthetical research was where the computer could unite both 
models: the mental and visual experience. Like Cohen and other 
computer artists, he believed this rational method would enable 
a fuller understanding of the creative process. “Through detailed 
programming analysis,” Mohr wrote, “one is able to visualize 
logical and abstract models of human thinking, which leads deep 
into the understanding of creative processing.”108
The most sustained and significant influence on Mohr’s thinking 
and practice was the writing of Max Bense. Under the influence 
of Bense’s semiotics, Mohr shifted from action painting toward 
the rational construction of art through a more consciously 
systematic and abstract approach. After an intensive study of the 
semiotician’s writings on generative aesthetics, Mohr became an 
exponent of Max Bense’s theory, adopting his term “generative 
art” to describe his own works. Through Bense’s theories, Mohr 
attempted to understand the semiotic state of the sign in art. His 
work was concerned with the semiotic relationships between 
signs and systems. His P-120-A Meta Language II  (Figure 3.10), 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 140
which is a constellation of hieroglyphic-like marks varying in small 
increments laid out on a matrix, shows his increasing interest in 
linguistics. As he explored the syntagmatic relationship between 
the forms or signs in the visual paradigm, Mohr’s images become 
indexes of the algorithmic system that generated them. Mohr called 
the signs he generated tre graphiques  or “graphic entities” as they 
were often known. Reading his work as a text, the viewer is required 
to provide a semantic analysis. Algorithms are used to calculate the 
images, effectively rendering the artist’s thinking as visible through 
computer programs. From 1969, Mohr characterized his approach 
as “algorithmic thinking,” a term that was to be used later in the 
formation of the Algorists, a movement that Mohr would eventually 
be associated with.FIGURE 3.10  Manfred Mohr, P-120-A Meta Language II,  1972. Plotter 
drawing on paper, 19.7 × 19.7 in. Courtesy of the artist.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 141
From 1972, Mohr began employing the structure of the cube 
as a system and alphabet, and through the years he has always 
maintained the structural elements and constraints of the cube as his 
vocabulary. As the mathematical symbol for the representation of 
the third dimension and a key object in early modernist abstraction, 
the cube is an appropriate unit for Mohr’s algorithmic exploration. 
In his work phase between 1972 and 1975 (entitled the Cubic 
Limit ), Mohr constructed an alphabet of signs from the 12 lines of a 
cube. Statistical and positioning information were used to generate 
an array of cubic signs. In other works, combinatorial, logical, and 
additive operators generated the global and local structures of the 
images.
For Mohr, the disintegration of symmetry is a basic generator 
of new constructions and relations. This deconstruction correlates 
to Molnar’s and the Bangerts’ movement toward disorder and 
the increased fascination in chaos and complexity in the 1980s. 
Toward the late 1970s, Mohr’s cubes were divided into two parts 
by one of the Cartesian planes (Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12). For 
each image, the two partitions contained independent rotations of 
a cube. They were projected into two dimensions and clipped by 
a square window (the projection of a cube at 0,0,0 degrees). By 
rotating both parts of these cubes in small but different increments, 
long sequences of images developed.
The shift toward viewing the computer as a generative medium 
driven by the algorithmic process mirrored theoretical developments 
FIGURE 3.11  Manfred Mohr, P-196-A, 1977. Plotter drawing on paper, 
19.7 × 19.7 in. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 142
in computer science. At the close of the 1960s, programming was 
being based on solid theoretical ground. In 1968, Donald E. Knuth 
published the first of a projected seven-volume series called The 
Art of Computer Programming . Volume One, “Fundamental 
Algorithms,” laid out techniques of programming for which 
comparatively little theory had been established. Others followed 
suit, with practitioners looking closely at algorithmic procedures, 
programming languages, and data structures. By the mid-1970s, 
artists were advocating a rigorous inspection of the algorithmic 
process, with Robert Mallary believing that a clear understanding 
of the algorithm was “an intellectual discipline of the first order.”109
Following the European abstract aesthetic of the previous 
decade, researchers further developed aesthetic theory in relation to FIGURE 3.12  Manfred Mohr, P-197-A, 1977. Plotter drawing on paper, 
19.7 × 19.7 in. Courtesy of the artist.

VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 143
computational algorithms.110 The computer scientist James Gips and 
the aesthetician George Stiny completed a range of investigations 
that applied “algorithmic methods to art theory and criticism.”111 
This included using algorithmic models for “different aesthetic 
viewpoints” to “interpret and evaluate works of art.”112 The 
scientists were interested in constructing algorithms that generated 
descriptions, interpretations, and evaluations of works of art. Gips 
also explored the uses of “shape grammars” to generate a new 
class of figure, which provided the design elements for a number of 
abstract paintings.113 Once a formal system for generating figures 
was constructed, one could interpret and evaluate paintings along 
aesthetic lines. By 1975, researchers like Gips had devised a formal 
system that interactively defined the rules for producing a painting. It 
used the rules to generate and display the painting and then evaluated 
the painting relative to the specific aesthetic viewpoint devised.
While much had been achieved in experimental aesthetics, 
and interest in the movement had widened, criticism concerning 
computer art only intensified during the 1970s. Outweighing the 
expressions of positive reassurance and optimism, unfavorable 
appraisals emerged from many quarters and took many forms. 
What appeared to be a type of Renaissance—a rebirth of art made 
possible by the digital revolution—was illusory, more virtual than 
real. Most criticism was built on the anxieties and skepticism felt 
in the 1960s. The Two Cultures  debate continued to frame much 
of the antagonism between technologists and artists, and the 
continuing debate over its aesthetic value was fought within this 
cultural divide.
Computer art had, especially in the European countries, a 
theoretical foundation in experimental aesthetics and information 
theory; a series of international exhibitions; a growing legion of 
artists moving into the field; and a burgeoning industry prepared to 
provide future support. Yet, with all of these encouraging factors, 
by the end of the decade it was floundering. As in the previous 
decade, the mainstream art community remained suspicious of the 
true intent of the scientist and technologist. For many critics, the 
scientist was colonizing a once sacrosanct space with an art form 
that undoubtedly carried militaristic overtones. Even many artists 
coming into the field in the 1970s feared that the technologist 
would stigmatize computer art. In 1987, the art historian Cynthia 
Goodman laid responsibility for the poor critical reception at the feet 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 144
of the scientist. Even though they did “much to advance computer 
graphics,” their “dubious” aesthetics contributed to the “confusion 
and criticism of the discipline.”114 Also commenting in the 1980s, 
Lovejoy believed that the computer in the early stages was “used 
as an analytic tool for formal Modernist conceptual works rather 
than as an active partner.”115 “As a result,” Lovejoy conceded, “it 
became stigmatized as a medium for art production and receded 
into the background.”116 Likewise, in 1999 new media critic 
Michael Rush felt that “the aesthetic standard” of early computer 
art was “questionable” because “many of these investigators were 
first scientists, with non-vocational interests in art.”117
However, negative assessment was not confined to retrospective 
accounts. Art critics were highly anxious about scientists 
transgressing the distinct boundaries of art. While many of the 
scientists and engineers of EAT only wanted to embed technological 
sophistication into art, Lillian Schwartz believed that the “scientists 
often wanted to be considered artists.”118 Also, disputes “arose 
between the artists and the scientists, and just as some of the 
scientists declared that they were artists, some of the artists claimed 
substantial scientific knowledge.”119
During the 1970s, many artists avowed their claims to computer 
art. Following the lead of many critics, the artists discounted the 
impact of scientists and technologists. For a number of artists, 
including Stuart Smith, the “glamour and mystique” of the medium 
in the 1960s had dissipated, allowing the serious artist to move 
beyond curiosity and novelty and assert some of the core artistic 
capability of the medium.120 For the artistic community, the scientist 
fell short of an iconoclast or innovator, which was perhaps an 
unfair assessment, and so under scientific control, artists believed 
much of the computer’s art-making capability was squandered. 
Thus, Karen Loewengart, for example, believed that the medium’s 
true beginning rightfully belonged to the 1970s when artists began 
to play a larger role.121
Generally speaking, however, computer art, whether artistic or 
scientific, was judged deficient. In 1972, critic Robert E. Mueller 
wrote in Art in America  (only one of a few articles to appear in 
mainstream art journals on computer art) that the visual results 
from computers have been “exceedingly poor and uninspiring.”122 
According to Mueller, technologists lacked the necessary 
knowledge of art and its history, and the visual results, which 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 145
were mathematically inspired, bored the “sophisticated artistic 
mind to death.”123 He called the scientists the “Idols of Computer 
Art,” following Francis Bacon’s criticism (famously called “Idols 
of Science”) that examined the follies of scientific theorization. 
Through this paradigm of Idols, Mueller proceeded to criticize 
every type of computer art that had yet been produced, calling them 
all “false notions.”124 Mueller, who obtained an engineering degree 
from MIT before studying aesthetics at NYU, was one of only a few 
critics with the knowledge to write coherently about computer art 
processes at the time. Though judging the computer art as lacking, 
he hoped for a future when the computer would allow direct, real-
time manipulation, which did eventuate in the 1980s. Such artistic 
control he saw in a hybrid of computer and video technology. A 
year before Mueller’s critique, John Canaday, lacking the deep 
knowledge of Mueller, complained about the overly didactic panels 
accompanying the works, as they were simply “unintelligible” to 
the layman.125 With its technical language and pointless creations, 
he ridiculed the computer art exhibition that he was reviewing for 
the New York Times  as a “circus.”126
Even exponents (Mueller was perhaps in this category too) 
believed that the computer art of the 1960s lacked innovation and 
was, as Mezei asserted, essentially “artless.”127 For others artists, 
such as Gary William Smith of PAGE, simulating existing styles 
that were practiced by Noll, Nake, and others failed to explore 
computer art’s new dimensions. For Smith, simulating existing 
art lacked all innovation because it could easily be completed by 
conventional tools—a sentiment shared by Canaday. Mallary, 
another avid artist and commentator, thought that computer art 
was “yet to make much of an impact,” and as it stood in the 1970s, 
it was “simply not that impressive.”128 Similarly, mathematician 
and artist Frieder Nake wrote in 1970: “the actual production in 
artistic computer graphics is repeating itself” and truly “good ideas 
haven’t shown up for quite a while.”129 Even the pioneer computer 
scientist Edmund C. Berkeley, the individual who years before had 
popularized the term “computer art,” felt that critics and the general 
public were still adverse to computer art aesthetics because there 
were no “beautiful, interesting [or] important” computer artworks 
produced to date.130
In the late 1970s, Nicolas Negroponte, the founder of MIT’s 
famed AMG and Media Lab, launched a withering attack on 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 146
the movement. He believed computer art was a combination of 
superficial and elemental acts from both the sciences and art which 
produced an equivalent mediocre product:
The symmetry and periodicity of the Lissajous figures (easily 
generated curves on TV screens), transformations into and out 
of recognizable patterns, and the happenstance of stochastic 
processing epitomize the current palette of gadgetry used by 
either the playful computer scientist or the inquiring artist in 
the name of art. While the intentions may be good, the results 
are predominantly bad art and petty programming. In almost all 
cases the signature of the machine is far more apparent than the 
artist’s.131
Computer art was continually criticized as “trivial dabbling” or a 
banal attempt at legitimizing a mathematical art form.132 It was 
clear that computer art’s appeal to mathematics—the “Queen of 
the Sciences”—was overpowering for the art tradition. Many felt 
that computer artists fetishized both the machine and the abstract 
sciences.
Through the twentieth century, modernist artists and critics 
found themselves in an ambivalent relationship with the abstract 
sciences. There have been many artists, such as Max Bill, who 
gained success from a mathematical approach, while there are 
others who have been continually condemned for the reductive and 
rational visions of mathematics.133 The complex spatial possibilities 
suggested by a fourth dimension, as well as the curved space of 
non-Euclidean geometry, were popular among artists in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth century. Piet Mondrian described 
how the eyes of the modern subject or spectator had gradually 
opened to underlying principles which had up to then been veiled 
by naturalistic appearance. Likewise, Kazimir Malevich talked 
of reduction and precision in his writing. However, Malevich 
had always claimed his paintings were intuitive, while Mondrian 
always maintained that his work had nothing to do with dogma 
or mechanical method. Nevertheless, early modernist abstraction 
for many critics came to represent the vision of technological 
and mathematical precision. In 1929, the German art historian 
and critic Carl Einstein attacked what he called the “moralist 
of pure form preaching for the square, filled with mathematical 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 147
drunkenness.”134 As art historian Briony Fer suggests, Einstein 
described mathematically inspired art as a “fantasy—and a puerile 
fantasy at that—in which mathematics had become like a new 
kind of fetish object.”135 The critic thought geometric painting just 
illustrated doctrines which were not only aesthetically unappealing 
but also authoritarian. These “standardized and hygienic pictures” 
were, as Einstein wrote, “for us only hypertrophies of order.”136 
The late modernist critics took particular pains in dissociating 
the masters of early abstraction from overt mathematical ties or 
charges of mechanical thinking. Clement Greenberg spoke of the 
importance of Mondrian’s intuition as a way for the artist to avoid 
the mechanical. Many pointed to the fact that the constructivists 
and the members of the de Stijl movement used relatively simple 
mathematical relations, such as proportions. As mentioned in the 
previous chapter, LeWitt distanced himself from the mathematical 
process by claiming that he only required relatively simple 
mathematical relations.
The rendering and study of mathematical patterns, central 
to the Islamic tradition, was depreciated or trivialized by the 
modernist tradition. One only needs to examine the reception of 
M. C. Escher within the art establishment. Habitually dismissed 
by artists, Escher’s detached perspective which was associated with 
the “deadeye of science” sent—as one author claims—“shivers 
through the arts.”137 Yet, the science world has almost universally 
admired Escher’s drawings. Evidently, many from the mainstream 
art world placed computer art within the same category as Escher’s 
work. For these critics, computer art had an undue reliance on the 
form and rhetoric of mathematics. In addition, computer artists 
had an extreme mechanistic view of nature and required continual 
recourse to mathematical models. Their intimacy with the abstract 
sciences meant that computer artists were seen to divorce art from 
psychological, moral, and social life. Whereas the artist creates 
images freely and intuitively, the computer artists merely explored 
the limits of an abstract procedure or system. Robert E. Mueller 
wrote of this secondary, derivative process:
Though we can say that mathematics is not art, some 
mathematicians think of themselves as artists of pure form. It 
seems clear, however, that their elegant and near aesthetic forms 
fail as art, because they are secondary visual ideas, the product 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 148
of an intellectual set of restraints, rather than the cause of a felt 
insight realized in and through visual form.138
Mueller’s criticism conflicted with Canaday. Canaday believed 
that the real power of the computer was its ability to produce 
with exactitude a type of pure mathematical beauty from a 
programmed equation. However, he believed that this object should 
remain part of the visual sciences. Mueller, though dismissing the 
secondary nature of mathematically generated art, believed that 
“Controlled Serendipity,” as he described it, had the most potential. 
Randomizers had a feedback process that allowed the artist to 
search for interesting results; yet for Mueller it was fully determined 
and as “equally fallacious” as the other modes of computer art 
production.139 For critics, relying on random procedures and the 
automatism of the machine meant that such artists were disengaged 
from the humanistic world of meaning and culture. Subsequently, 
art was reduced to the lowest ethical level by ceding all resemblance 
of human intuition to a machine.
Computer art was also, as the famed cosmologist John 
D. Barrow described, “heavily biased toward attracting the 
attention of our brain’s most basic pattern-recognition skills.”140 
Computer art became, as Mueller suggested, “like snowflakes and 
kaleidoscopic or natural forms, quite impressive in themselves as 
are all manifestations of order to the human mind,” but in terms of 
aesthetic complexity, it did not go beyond basics and thus it lacked 
resonance.141 The “Idol of the Kaleidoscope,” as Mueller described 
a certain section of computer artists, lead us to “pleasant design, 
but not, I think, to art.”142
By 1970, Nake announced in a highly polemic essay entitled 
“There Should Be No Computer Art” that he would no longer 
exhibit his work.143 According to Jonathan Benthall, in 1971 
Nake “denounced the whole concept of works of ‘computer art’ 
as a decadent fad.”144 Mezei also left the field citing the direction 
that computer art was taking was not sufficiently humanistic. The 
computer specialist Noll, who retired “disillusioned from the field,” 
wrote in one of his many pronouncements that computers in art 
were “yet to produce anything approaching entirely new aesthetic 
experiences.”145 Much of the most strident criticism came from 
computer artists themselves. Cohen, one of the most celebrated 
artists working with computers, continually attacked the idea of 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 149
computer art. He thought that computer art was the “most absurd 
nonsense ever produced in the name of art.”146 Even the editor of 
Leonardo  initially expressed doubts over visually based computer 
art and its ability to generate anything new. As Frank Malina wrote 
in his opening article on computer art, “I have a critical attitude 
toward the output of computers instructed by artists.”147 Malina 
believed that the most “important benefit to be expected from the 
use of computers by artists will be sociological.” The computer could 
“help to dispel the not uncommon view that computers are monsters 
rather than highly sophisticated devices.”148 Here, computer art is a 
mere facilitator for scientific humanism to take the abstract edge off 
technology. It had no redeeming features in its own right.
The ambivalent regard in which both the art and science 
communities held computer art was evident in the 1970 ACM 
national symposium in New York, the exhibition John Canaday 
reviewed. The original title of the symposium was “Computer Art: 
Is It a Dismal Failure?” However, after deliberations, the title was 
changed to the more optimistic “Computer Art: Its Prospects for the 
Future.” There was a similar dilemma in 1974 at a seminar in Israel 
entitled “The Interaction of Art and Science.” From the proceedings 
emerged two factions: one made up of “fervent believers in the 
all-pervading influence of computer art” and the second was 
those who “didn’t think that it was art at all.”149 While there 
was an “impassioned defense” of computer art by both Vladimir 
Bonačič and A. Michael Noll, the “current state” of computer art 
was summed up snidely by one of the delegates as “a big load of 
nothing.”150
The insecurity surrounding computer art was in part due to the 
refusal of the art community to validate computer art as art. For 
proponents of computer art, the computer was a part of an art 
tradition that saw the artist acquire and explore the latest technology 
and tools. Franke, defending the stance that machines under the 
control of humans could create art, argued that it was “patently 
far too crude a reading of history to assert that, because until now 
machines have not been used for the creation of plastic art, computer 
creations cannot qualify as art; yet such a defensive position is still 
maintained by a number of critics.”151 Although in some quarters 
there was a gracious, somewhat patronizing support, most resisted 
attempts to legitimize the form. For example, many within the most 
esteemed of art institutions, such as the Museum of Modern Art, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 150
did not include computer art among their art categories.152 Some 
from the humanities argued that computer art failed to contribute 
anything of value to society or the arts, especially when the political 
consciousness in art was reaching its apogee.153 This lack of faith 
in computer art was not confined to the arts. Many scientists also 
felt that computer art was inconsequential. Abraham Moles, the 
scientist who had formulated the influential theory of information 
aesthetics, made light of computer art as “the kitsch to come.”154 
The viewpoint of some from the computer science community, 
such as Negroponte, was that computer art was “for the most 
part a Calcomp contest,” a novel, yet opportunistic attempt by 
the printer production company to promote the computer and its 
imaging capabilities.155 In many respects, this assertion was correct, 
as computer companies deliberately used computer art through 
advertising and competitions to bring a “humanizing aura” to 
computers and their product.156 Other critics looked dimly at this 
overt commercialism too.
By the mid-1970s, critics and practitioners felt the need to 
defend computer art against persistent criticism. On an aesthetic 
level, many commentators like Leavitt felt that the criticism 
of the new medium was unfair since computer art was “still in 
the highly experimental stages of emergence” and was only 
progressing relatively slowly “beyond its mathematical and 
scientific origins.”157 Leavitt felt that the general public and the 
artist in particular had been “conditioned to react negatively to 
computers.”158 For Knowlton, the computer was “catching hell 
from growing multitudes” of humanists who uniformly viewed 
computers as the “tools of regulation” that suffocated “all things 
warm, moist, and human.”159 The German artist Manfred Mohr 
also felt that a “quasi-mystical fear of an incomprehensible 
technology” was still omnipresent in society.160 Technophobia and 
anti-computer sentiment resulted in Mohr keeping his manner 
of production secret from the art world right up until the 1980s. 
The only genuine openness shown by Mohr was to the computer 
science publication Computers and People .
This clandestine behavior was not an overreaction. In the early 
1970s, Mohr, who was an invited lecturer at the Sorbonne, was 
faced with violent reactions from students who viewed the computer 
as a corrupt instrument of capitalist power and control. Mohr 
quotes: “On one occasion in 1972 in Paris a student accused me of 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 151
using a devilish capitalistic instrument to make corrupt art  … even 
an egg was thrown at me.”161 The handwritten responses made on 
a wall panel from Mohr’s 1971 first solo exhibition of computer-
generated art Computer Graphics—Une Esthétique Programmée , 
which was held at the Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, 
illustrated the spectrum of responses (Figure 3.13). The wall panel 
was headed with the question: “Que pensez-vous de la recherché 
esthetique faite a l’aide d’un ordinateur?” (What do you think of 
creative research that is assisted by the computer?) One museum-
goer responded with “Mohr est des a mort” (Mohr is death), while 
another wrote: “D’absurd l’ordinateur n’est pas esthetique” (It is 
absurd, the computer is not aesthetic.)
By the end of the 1970s, many questioned computer art’s 
viability. Even though Franke and Reichardt had added historical 
resonance to computer art, many still believed it to be facile and 
trivial—an expired novelty art. In fact, so endemic was the cynicism 
toward computer art that Reichardt’s career was thwarted when 
she received negative treatment from the art establishment after 
her involvement with computer art and her curatorial role in 
FIGURE 3.13  Manfred Mohr, Wall Panel (guest book), Computer Graphics—
Une Esthétique Programmée,  ARC—Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de 
Paris 1971. Sprocketed computer paper on a wooden board, 30.5 × 110.6 in. 
Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 152
Cybernetic Serendipity . For many mainstream artists, computer 
artists simply “surrendered to the machine” and produced what 
was tantamount to mechanical “folk art.”162 On reflection, Mezei 
wrote that computer art had reached a “plateau of stagnation after 
an exhilarating start full of promise.”163 The technologist Nicholas 
Negroponte was more blunt in his 1979 assessment: “Rarely have 
two disciplines joined forces seemingly to bring out the worst in 
each other as have computers and art.”164
Many believed that the union between art and computers 
had not lived up to initial expectations.165 As early as 1971, the 
renowned psychologist John Cohen, writing on the relationship 
between creativity, technology, and the arts, believed that although 
mathematics had something to contribute to the arts, its contribution 
was small.166 Through the study and implementation of the stylistic 
and structural attributes of masterpieces, many exponents of Max 
Bense’s formal theories thought it possible to generate masterworks. 
However, formal aesthetics systems did not fulfill the original 
ambitions. Although they hoped to mechanize genius, art’s secrets 
remained elusive. As Reichardt rightly pointed out:
Both Max Bense and Abraham Moles approach such an analysis 
from the peripheries of the structure of the work, but to this day 
there isn’t a single masterpiece that has been made according 
to the principles of generative aesthetics. The essential core of 
a work of art remains still to be fragmented, rationalized and 
reconstructed.167
As a result of these overestimations, the will to uncover art’s secrets 
through empirical methods began to abate by the late 1970s. For 
most artists and critics, formalist aesthetics was a closed system and 
exceedingly self-contained. The artist of the 1970s wanted to treat 
computing like a natural language—rule-governed, yet constantly 
changing, and by definition open-ended. For the artist, language 
like art was not an object that could be studied with the law-like 
precision of science. For them, mathematical rules could not unlock 
the nature of art. Art had an elusive holistic character that kept it 
beyond the grasp of science. By the 1980s Franke, in his new edition 
of Computer Graphic—Computer Art  (1985), abandoned much of 
the demystifying rhetoric and truculent anti-spiritual materialism 
that concluded his first edition.
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 153
While interest in computer art continued to grow through 
the 1970s, its success was negligible compared with video art. 
Though sharing the same historical context, video art emerged as 
a potent new form of representation. As major artists entered the 
field and prompted interest from funding institutions, video was 
quickly accepted as a legitimate art form. Video quickly became 
the new avant-garde and attracted a number of high profile 
festivals. New journals and magazines, such as Radical Software  
and Art Com , were established in response to video’s phenomenal 
growth. These publications unified the video movement by giving 
it a legitimizing history and a strong sense of community. By 1975, 
group exhibitions, panels, symposia, and magazines were devoted 
to video art practice. In contrast, computer art remained within the 
scope of specialist publications and relied on esoteric and highly 
abstract non-art theories for explanation. Furthermore, the critical 
discourse surrounding video rose “to greet it,” to use critic David 
Antin’s expression,168 whereas computer art was serviced mostly 
by the artists rather than critics and theorists. Most importantly, 
however, the museums, institutions, and funding agencies, which 
were skeptical at first, embraced video art and gave it stability. Apart 
from being accepted curatorially, video was supported critically. 
By the mid-1970s there were a number of large survey exhibitions 
devoted to video art, including Video Art  organized by Suzanne 
Delehanty for the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia.169
Although they both emerged under the influence of the Art and 
Technology movement, one must acknowledge that video art’s 
origins were different from those of computer art. Video emerged 
from the television industry rather than the military industry. 
Importantly, video emerged as a political and aesthetic opposition 
to commercial television genres. Considered as a tool of social 
change, video also held the remaining desires of the counterculture. 
Because of its political dimension, video did not attract the same 
anti-technology sentiment as the computer. The computer, on the 
other hand, was never conceptualized in terms of resistance or 
protest; rather, it was distinctly a result of Cold War paradigms. In 
addition, the computer was a significantly different media. Video 
was portable, was relatively cost-effective (especially in relation 
to computing), was interactive, had immediate feedback, and 
permitted public broadcast transmission, something that attracted 
Mueller to the idea of incorporating computing to video. With its 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 154
documenting abilities, it was a highly flexible medium. With relative 
ease, video could be incorporated into the fabric of performance 
and installation practice with all the potential of narrative and 
autobiographical exploration. This created work of great diversity, 
which contrasted with the often formulaic work produced with 
computers.
However, there were many similarities between the two technical 
art forms. Both blossomed in the late 1960s and were proclaimed 
as the most advanced and revolutionary media of their day. Like 
video, which had been praised for being the new democratic art 
form, computer art was also framed in similar terms. While both 
were conceptualized through cybernetics and information theory, 
with video having less direct relevance, video was understood 
through the new media ideals of McLuhan. Through its 
instantaneous communicability, video was celebrated in terms of its 
global consciousness. Like video art, but without the same success, 
computer art was attempting to define its inherent characteristics 
as a way to legitimize itself. Whereas computer art received minor 
support, New York Times  critic Grace Glueck felt that video in the 
1970s was “a developing medium in its own right.”170 Following 
critics such as Gene Youngblood, artists “separated the video 
medium from the history of film and of film language and theory” 
in an attempt to “distinguish it from other art forms.”171 Like many 
exponents of computer art, they stressed the medium’s uniqueness 
as a reason for an exclusive new category. In contrast to computer 
art, by the close of the decade video became an autonomous art 
category.
Those working within the computer art project continually 
desired the validation of the computer as a legitimate medium. To 
the frustration of many, computer art in the 1970s did not gain this 
confirmation. While computer art emerged into a climate where the 
idioms of art were diversifying more than any other time in history—a 
period when traditional criteria were being discarded—computer 
art for many was a bridge too far. This is perhaps why the decade 
was shrouded in an aura of disappointment. In recent histories of 
computer art, the 1970s has been portrayed as the Dark Ages, a 
period of decline after a promising start. However, while computer 
art did not emerge with the same pervasive impact as video, there 
were a number of important advances made in the decade. Firstly, 
the central trope of the Renaissance figure materialized in the form 
VIRTUAL  RENAISSANCE 155
of the artist-programmer, which became a key idea in the following 
decade. The Renaissance figure of the artist-programmer merged 
with the metaphor of the “frontier explorer” and the early artists 
became the pioneers of this quest. In the 1980s, with the personal 
computer and the idea of the “virtual” emerging, this mythology 
was strengthened. Secondly, images shifted from the unmistakable 
impress of the machine, such as precision and exactitude, toward 
the delicate imprint of the human artificer and the beguiling 
complexities of natural and organic form. And finally, artists 
began to build their own artistic and aesthetic systems, using the 
computer as an aid in the production of multigenerational forms, 
an enduring and important idea that was lost on most critics. In the 
place of a single definitive form, the artist generated multiple forms 
and permutations. Subsequently, the metaphor of growth began to 
surface with increasing intensity in the 1980s. In the next decade, the 
morphological point of view, under the influence of the new science 
of complexity, became increasingly important as artists explored 
form as it mutates and transforms within the art-making system. The 
open-ended nature of computer art, its perpetual incompleteness 
and continual growth, provided a precedent for the Web as a 
medium in the 1990s. Before then, however, popular technoscience 
paradigms, such as the science of complexity, emboldened artists 
to explore the unfathomable in ordered and chaotic systems. This 
resulted in an increased mystification of the computer. The spiritual 
quest where the power of transcendental Platonic realities—such 
an important part of 1960s computer art—emerged again as a vital 
idea in computer art. While mathematics remained a key part of the 
computer art consciousness, in the 1980s the introduction of the 
personal computer and commercial software allowed new artists to 
use the computer without any formal understanding of mathematics 
or the machine’s vast complexities. The virtuoso artist-programmer, 
now with a stable mythology, came under threat from the influx 
of artist “users” who employed the computer with the flair of a 
traditional art tool. So began the rhetorical debate over the correct 
and most meaningful use of the computer in art.
Roman Verostko in his seminal 1988 article “Epigenetic Painting” 
wrote enthusiastically that working with the computer was a world 
of endless discovery, for “each frontier opens a new frontier.”1 
That same year, fellow artist David Em wrote that the computer 
was a “wonderful and mysterious gift.”2 For Lillian Schwartz, the 
computer was “never lifeless,” for it hummed as if it were “cogitating 
some primordial secret” that it would reveal if suitably nurtured.3 
Even though it had been the practice from the beginning to privilege 
the rational within computer art, the mythological element has 
always lingered near the surface. As shown in previous chapters, 
the computer’s metaphorical link to the mind and its descent from 
the mysterious Enlightenment automaton meant that computers were 
continually anthropomorphized. In addition, the computer possessed 
a mythic link to mathematics through the arcane allure of Pythagorean 
harmonia . Importantly, in the 1980s these narratives combined 
with Platonic transcendentalism to provide a new mythology that 
characterized the computer as a portal into unknown, unseen, and 
unexplored worlds of digital abstraction. For many, the computer 
was an “infinite machine,”4 which gave access to a vast metaphysical 
frontier that was akin to what Versotko described as an “unfolding 
universe of visual form.”5 Even before the conceptualization of 
“cyberspace” (the cybernetics metaphor of the “steersman,” derived 
from the Greek term “kybernêtikê,” meaning the pilot), the voyager or 
explorer was a central metaphor for computer artists. The pioneering 
explorer, intrinsically linked to the idea of the frontier, is traditionally 
a figure who explores the limits of the known world.CHAPTER FOUR
Frontier exploration
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 158
The frontier, which is a central trope within American history 
and avant-garde ideology, emerges as a crucial mythology in 
computer art discourse. Those writing in the 1980s look back to 
the originators of computer art as the founders, the pioneers of a 
new art form. The early computer artists are celebrated as heroic 
historical figures who struggled, opened new territories, and pushed 
the boundaries of knowledge in the unforgiving environment of 
early computing. The computer artist of the 1980s built on the 
pioneer/explorer metaphor by incorporating the dream of space 
exploration, the most potent frontier mythology at the time in 
American culture. Like the astronaut, the computer artist set forth 
to explore worlds that were essentially already out there, in the 
logical realm of potentiality. Emboldened by the new technoscience 
paradigm of order and complexity, the computer became a micro-
universe, an unimaginable new world ready for tireless exploration.
Ever since the 1950s when the computer first entered the 
cultural psyche, it had evoked a special kind of wonderment. The 
tendency to both anthropomorphize and mythologize the machine 
was part of the general public’s, and indeed the artists’, inability to 
comprehend the logical complexities of the machine. The artist was 
often left dumbfounded as the movement from the symbolic and 
programmatic to the visual created totally unanticipated and novel 
results. For the computer artists, the appeal of the computer also lay 
in its ability to configure new visual worlds through Cartesian spatial 
logic, which expanded at incredible speed due to new computer 
graphic capabilities. Nevertheless, the creationist mythology was 
always present in computer art. From the beginning, computer 
artists were captivated by the power of origination; as technologist 
Frank Dietrich reminisced, it was like being an “omnipotent creator,” 
creating a “new universe” with “its own physical laws.”6 Charles 
Csuri, another important pioneer, believed that the power to change 
the parameters of the logical and spatial realm of the computer 
gave him the ability to create his “own personal science fiction.”7 
Constructing entirely new geometric bodies and architectonic 
structures which had no physical existence propelled the artist, as 
Franke described, “toward new domains.”8
Part of this fascination with new spatial worlds was predicated 
on the rapid accomplishments in computer graphics. In the 1970s, 
there was a shift from vector graphics orientation, with its linear 
configuration, toward the continuous tonal imagery of raster 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 159
graphics. These new techniques allowed for far greater realism. 
Three-dimensional modeling and rendering systems spawned a 
new genre of futuristic inspired computer imagery based on the 
popular scientific themes of the day, which were primarily space 
travel and exploration. The rudimentary linear forms of the 1960s 
and 1970s, which mirrored modernist hard-edge abstraction, gave 
way to totally new images that were both complex and highly 
vibrant. These synthetic images, mystical and imaginative as they 
were, became emblematic of the new computer age. This type of 
computer-generated image graced the myriad of computer graphic 
publications of the day. Overall, the images were futuristic—from 
galactic images of space to the newest product design—and typified 
the future like no other form of representation.
David Em’s highly synthetic artwork best epitomizes the 
new futurist-space thematic that emerged within the computer 
art movement. In 1975, Em was fortunate to gain access to the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which had some of the most 
sophisticated and powerful computers in the world (Figure 4.1). No 
FIGURE 4.1  David Em at the California Institute of Technology’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, 1983. Photograph by James Seligman. © David 
Em. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 160
previous artist had gained access to supercomputers. Em had at his 
disposal new software interfaces, paint programs, and the electronic 
stylus, which had been developed by the famous computer graphics 
pioneer James F. Blinn. Blinn developed, for scientific purposes, new 
techniques for representing surfaces within computer-simulated 
models. The new techniques of texture mapping and curved light 
surfaces created synthetic three-dimensional realities. JPL had been 
closely involved with the growth of American space exploration 
through its critical astrophysics and rocketry research. It soon 
became apparent that NASA would require enhanced graphics 
capabilities to process video imagery received from deep space 
probes and also to develop graphic simulation models to help build 
an engaging visual narrative of space exploration. In 1979, Blinn 
created a sensation with his computer graphic simulations of the 
historic Voyager probe. The computer-generated animation showed 
the craft moving past Saturn and far into the solar system. The 
graphic simulations ignited the public’s imagination more so than 
the Voyager’s actual visual transmissions from space. Like Blinn’s 
simulations, Em’s art was often seen as promotion for the latest 
graphic techniques, which increasingly sought ultra photo-realistic 
modes. Influenced by JPL projects to visualize space phenomena 
unseen by human eyes, Em generated fantastic 3-D spacescapes. 
Persepol  is a prime example where Em, employing the latest graphic 
rendering software on the most powerful computers, combined 
ancient iconography with the symmetry and recursive patterning of 
previous computer art to create unearthly landscapes (Figure 4.2).
The impact of space exploration and notions of exploring 
the outer limits of the known universe is also embodied in the 
work of the nuclear physicist Melvin Prueitt.9 Prueitt produced 
the popular publication Art and the Computer  (1984), which, as 
the author outlined, demonstrated the “fine works of art being 
produced by artists using computers.”10 The book follows many 
of the computer graphic publications of the period, which outline 
the different techniques and their application in science, business, 
and entertainment. Although Prueitt’s publication was concerned 
mostly with art, scientists and technologists produced much of 
the work, and the publication had a tendency to view the imagery 
through scientific paradigms and metaphors. For Prueitt, the arrival 
of the computer allowed him to materialize his inner visions, to 
transfer his imagining from the mind to the screen without relying 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 161
on any artistic training or innate ability. Effectively the computer 
allowed him—a scientist—or anyone else to become an artist. With 
the advent of the computer, as Franke suggested as early as 1971, 
manual skill was “no longer a precondition for engaging in art.”11 
Like Em, Prueitt used the latest modeling and texturing techniques 
from the graphics field to realize strange imaginative and surreal 
landscapes. Simulating the natural phenomena of accretion in cave 
systems by using exponential functions to create the stalagmite 
form, Prueitt produced the novel computer artwork Bright Caven  
(Figure 4.3). Both Prueitt and Em responded to the technoscience 
fantasies of the period. The computer was evoked as an instrument 
that assists the artist in imagining mystery worlds and future 
scenarios. Though the images were interesting in their novelty, the 
critics found them to be trite by-products of the commercialization 
and cultural expansion of the computer graphics industry.
Yet computer art, though criticized for its recourse to the latest 
science-inspired visions, had its own dynamic, a strengthening FIGURE 4.2  David Em, Persepol,  1980. © 1981 David Em. Courtesy 
of the artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 162
discourse in chaos and complexity theory. Although the subject of 
order and disorder had been central to 1970s computer artists such 
as Noll, Nake, and Molnar, the science of complexity as a cultural 
phenomenon did not emerge until midway through the 1970s. Not 
until the 1980s did it become a significant metaphor in the visual 
arts. As the decade developed, the field of complexity emerged as a 
highly mythologized scientific discourse. The scientist appeared as 
a heroic explorer probing the mysteries of the age. The popularity 
was due in part to two significant texts: Ilya Prigogine’s and Isabelle 
Stengers’ Order Out of Chaos: Man ’s New Dialogue with Nature  
(1984) and James Gleick’s Chaos: Making of a New Science  (1987). 
These texts portrayed the new paradigm as revolutionary and a 
threat to traditional orders and ways of thinking. In his history 
of chaos theory, Gleick lionizes the scientists as “genius” figures 
penetrating the deep dark secrets of the unknown through the 
butterfly effect, strange attractors, and Mandelbrot sets.
Emerging from the field of mathematics, the science of complexity 
was popularized under the title of chaos theory. Like cybernetics, FIGURE 4.3  Melvin Prueitt, Bright Caven,  1982. © 1982 Melvin L. 
Prueitt.

FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 163
chaos theory was applied to a variety of fields and modes of 
investigation. Its popularity was in part due to its wide application. 
Common experience and everyday human scale phenomena became 
valid fields for inquiry. Any complex natural system was emendable: 
the unstable atmosphere, turbulent seas, fluctuating populations, and 
irregular physiological phenomena. Likewise, cultural structures, 
such as the variability in the world stock markets and traffic flows, 
received new emphasis. As Gleick noted, chaos was applied to the 
“universe we see and touch,” which was in contrast to “glittering 
abstractions” of theoretical physics, which had “strayed far from 
the human intuition about the world.”12 Culturally, chaos theory 
promised to explain some of life’s uncertainties—those complexities 
and periods of chaos that seemed part of modern life.
After continual reinterpretation through the ages, in which 
the term “chaos” has acquired multiple meanings and varied 
signification, it underwent radical revaluation in the twentieth 
century. Historically, theories of chaos played central roles in 
most creation myths: the most common being that a divine power 
imposed form or order on primordial chaos. Since the scientific 
revolution, chaos had been envisioned as the antagonist to order, 
a perception that dominated the early nineteenth century. The 
irregular, disconnected, and erratic dimension of nature had come 
to be viewed by science as murky and unfathomable. This binary 
opposition between order and disorder was reinforced by the 
popularization of thermodynamics in the late nineteenth century, 
which foretold the cosmic dissipation of all heat sources and the 
ensuing so-called “heat death” of the universe. However, in the 
nineteenth century, the scientist Henri Poincaré began recognizing 
the potential of disorder within dynamic natural systems. He 
effectively became the originator of the modern science of chaos and 
complexity. The first half of the twentieth century was characterized 
by totalizing theories that established unequivocal relations between 
theory and observation in physics and mathematics. Following the 
two world wars, however, there was a questioning of this rising cult 
surrounding order. Universalizing theories became “associated with 
the mindless replication of military logic or with the oppressive 
control of a totalitarian state (or state of mind).”13 When various 
disciplines started to engage in the exploration of disorder in the 
second half of the century, chaos came to be seen as an emancipating 
force. Exploring the difficulties of nonlinear systems, the scientist of 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 164
complexity began where classical science ceased. While relativity 
and quantum theory had disposed some of Newton’s tenets, chaos 
eliminated the certainties of deterministic predictability. Soon chaos 
theory, positioned alongside relativity and quantum mechanics, was 
viewed as the great twentieth-century revolution in thought.
The science of complexity also had far-reaching consequences for 
philosophy. The cultural interest in scientific theories of complexity 
had been on the rise since the 1960s. Literary critic N. Katherine 
Hayles identified the “crucial turn” when chaos was envisaged 
not as an absence of order but as a positive force.14 The concept 
of atomism, the rigid framework for a schematized reality, was 
replaced by a structure with morphologic process at its core. This 
precipitated a variable collapse of established worldview, whereby 
randomness or chance was now fundamental to knowledge 
production. In the 1970s, the countercultural figures in the computer 
world became interested in chaos and complexity as a new world 
order.15 For these figures, complexity theory represented a particular 
holistic, even mystical, approach to ecology. At the same time, chaos 
entered the cultural matrix and was manifested in theories of post-
structuralism and then postmodernism. The discourse of chaos 
was employed to explain a raft of different cultural and theoretical 
phenomena. Under the influence of Jean-François Lyotard, who 
would become an influential theorist of postmodernism, the field 
of chaos theory was an affirmative premise. According to cultural 
theorist Stuart Sim, Lyotard was attracted to this new scientific 
practice because there was a “perpetual search for instabilities” 
and “paradox” rather than being concerned, as modern science had 
been, with “logical proof.”16 In the early 1980s, Lyotard forecasted 
the emergence of postmodern science in his influential publication 
The Postmodern Condition :
Postmodern science—by concerning itself with such things as 
undecidables, the limits of precise control, conflicts characterized 
by incomplete information, “ fracta ,” catastrophes, and pragmatic 
paradoxes—is theorizing its own evolution as discontinuous, 
catastrophic, nonrectifiable, and paradoxical … It is producing 
not the known, but the unknown.17
The image that most embodied visual complexity and nature’s imprint 
was fractal geometry: it became the icon of chaos. Lyotard cited 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 165
Benoît Mandelbrot’s fractal geometry as evidence of our incapability 
of reaching exact measurement. The word “fractal,” coined in 1975 
by IBM scientist Benoît Mandelbrot, described a set of curves which 
possessed complexity through increased dimensionality (Figure 4.4). 
Mandelbrot fractals were, as the mathematician asserted, “meant 
to be mathematical diagrams drawn to make a scholarly point.”18 
Importantly, fractals showed that many phenomena are intrinsically 
indeterministic. The Mandelbrot Set, identified as the most complex 
object in mathematics, transformed the application of geometric 
constructs within science and drastically changed the image of 
mathematics. By the mid-1980s, the phenomenon of “chaos culture,” 
as it was often termed, had taken hold with a dramatic increase in 
the number of publications dealing with both chaos and fractals. 
Unlike cybernetics, which had a limited impact on the mainstream 
art world, chaos theory and fractal geometry permeated some parts 
of the fine art world. Such was the cultural ubiquitousness of chaos 
theory that theorists and artists began to describe contemporary art 
in terms of this new paradigm. Even artists from traditional genres 
FIGURE 4.4  Heinz-Otto Peitgen and P.H. Richter, Map 48,  ca. 1986. 
Mandelbrot set from The Beauty of Fractals,  1986. Courtesy of Heinz-
Otto Peitgen.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 166
began exploring the key ideas flowing from chaos discourse. Heroic 
figures of this new geometry, Mandelbrot and Feigenbaum, were 
represented in the postmodern painting of Mark Tensey. The new 
multidimensional imagery seeped into the contemporary painting 
of Roberto Azank, who completed large fractal murals. Sculptor 
Rhonda Roland Shearer also worked with the concepts of chaos and 
fractal geometry. For Shearer, “new geometric views in the world,” 
such as influential non-Euclidian geometries within early twentieth-
century practice, became a “key catalyst for artistic developments.”19 
“Within this context,” the artist and journalist Shearer wrote in 1992, 
“the new geometric models of fractal geometry and chaos theory 
may signal another major innovation in art.”20 This new interest 
in technoscience paradigms also coincided with the 1986 Biennale 
of Venice, which was entitled Art and Science . The exhibition’s 
purpose, like previous conciliatory exhibitions, was “to try to bring 
together modern art and science after the division that had taken 
place between the humanistic and scientific cultures.”21
Although chaos and fractal geometry had garnered wider 
cultural and artistic significance, the real impact was in experimental 
mathematics and the generation of natural patterns in computer 
graphics. Computer art was intimately connected to these ventures. 
The rise of computer graphics as an integral part of scientific 
practice coincided historically with the emergence of chaos theory 
as a cultural force. In the West, the study of complex dynamics did 
not come into its own until computers became widespread and 
readily accessible. It was realized in the 1970s that simple sets of 
mathematical instructions carried out by a computer generate 
extremely complicated and strangely ordered effects. It meant that 
complex systems follow predictable paths to randomness, and 
through the computer one could perceive orders hidden within 
chaotic systems. Because studying the subtle structures underlying 
chaos and order was a visual process, visual images became crucial 
to understanding complexity. Thus, with the advent of the computer, 
experimental mathematics became increasingly visual. Progressively 
within the scientific world, the computer was employed to produce 
representations of data. This allowed the scientist to examine the 
data from a number of perspectives. The test tubes and microscopes 
of laboratories were often replaced with computers and their graphic 
applications. A caption in a popular scientific magazine captured 
the belief of the time: “Mathematicians couldn’t solve it until they 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 167
could see it!”22 Within the sciences, many believed that the rise 
to prominence of fractal geometry assisted the reunion of pure 
mathematics research with both natural sciences and computing. 
For those interested in computer art, such as artist Judson Rosebush, 
fractals were seen as procedural breakthroughs because they 
“introduce an entirely new class of parameters and an entirely new 
class of images.”23 Fractal geometry depended upon computers as 
nothing else previously had done. For many, this was something truly 
unique, a world inconceivable prior to the invention of the computer. 
For some, the ho-hum novelty of computer art had now turned to 
incontrovertible originality.
Fractal sets, however, were not the first to capture the attention of 
mathematicians interested in complexity. In the 1950s, through the 
development of cellular automation, John von Neumann recognized 
the computer’s ability to generate visual complexity. In his rule-based 
scheme, a single change in the automaton’s condition prompted 
a cascade of changes throughout the system. In the early 1970s, a 
more renowned cellular automaton was developed by the British 
mathematician John Conway. Called “Life,” this program with its 
simple determined rules generated an infinite variety of patterns. 
Importantly, it became apparent that when simple rules are applied 
recursively, the computer produces complex patterns which, curiously, 
reflected patterns in the universe. Computer art was directly affected 
by these discoveries and with the development of fractal geometry. The 
conflation of nature and computer systems continued to be pursued.
In the 1980s, fractal geometry demonstrated the computer’s 
ability to recreate nature’s hidden forms. Fractal geometry provided 
both a description and a mathematical model for many of the 
patterns and multifarious forms in nature. It was for Mandelbrot 
a “profound irony” that fractal geometry, which was described as 
“baroque” and “organic,” should “owe its birth to an unexpected 
but profound new match between the two symbols of the inhuman, 
the dry, and the technical: namely, between mathematics and the 
computer.”24 For computer graphics, fractal geometry now played 
a crucial role in the rendering, modeling, and animating of natural 
phenomena. By the 1980s, fractals were a key paradigm in computer 
graphics, playing a crucial role both in its development and 
increasing popularity. The new science of complexity would spawn 
a raft of fractal-related art forms, such as chaos art, fractal art, and 
map art. Reaching a zenith in the mid-1980s, these new visual forms 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 168
received extensive exposure through international exhibitions and 
media attention, only to fade as quickly as they surfaced.
By 1989, Mandelbrot confidently announced that in fact fractal 
geometry had “given rise to a new form of art.”25 This statement was a 
result of fractal geometry’s cultural popularity. For Mandelbrot, the 
success of fractals was assured because “nobody” was “indifferent 
to fractals” and because the viewer’s “first encounter” with fractal 
geometry provided a “totally new” aesthetic experience along with 
a changed perception of science.26 Like the computer art of the 
1960s and 1970s, fractals relied on the Pythagorean conception of 
beauty—the appeal to recursive symmetry and pattern—which, for 
Canaday and others, was the basest of all aesthetic responses. Also, 
like computer art’s perceived role in the 1960s, scientists involved 
in fractal geometry and chaos theory felt that the new paradigm 
provided a unifying concept that bridged the boundaries between 
science and art. Hence, in the 1980s, the computer again became 
a symbol of the unification of the cultural fields. In addition, 
fractal imagery, with its somewhat tenuous connection to visual 
art, had the role of effectively popularizing mathematics. In the 
mid-1980s, Franke employed random number generators, iterative 
techniques, and fractals to produce a number of visually innovative 
color computer artworks (Figure 4.5). The fractals’ popularity 
provoked a burgeoning of mathematically related art from the 
mid-1980s well into the 1990s. Like the visual by-products of 
computer-based scientific and mathematics research in the 1960s, 
fractal geometry was often exhibited under the rubric of computer 
art. Like computer art, fractal art emerged autonomously from 
the science world and had no direct reliance on the mainstream 
art world. Moreover, mirroring the beginnings of computer art, 
mathematicians and technologists were the first to popularize 
fractal imagery.27 Consequently, the hegemony of technoscience and 
mathematics remained central to computer art and its discourse, 
leaving it remote to mainstream art’s central concerns.
Fractal geometry shared much of computer art’s original 
mythological appeal. The mathematicians and scientists of fractal 
geometry were engrossed by the same unpredictability as the 
computer artists: consequence cannot be predicted, because as 
mathematician Heinz-Otto Peitgen and P. H. Richter explained, 
each “decision has the character of an amplification.”28 For scientist 
and author Clifford Pickover, creating fractals was like fishing for 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 169
“unexpected pleasures,” a sentiment that was first expressed by 
early computer artists.29 Increasingly, the nature of computers was 
seen in terms of territory, a visual sphere that invites discovery of a 
hidden world.
The new fractional dimension, the infinite self-embedding 
of complexity in the computer, gave the machine the feeling of 
boundlessness. The computer appeared to expand the range of human 
senses, becoming like the microscope or telescope, making visible 
for the first time what appeared to be a limitless realm. Exploring 
the infinitely magnifying borders of the Mandelbrot Set was likened 
to plunging the viewer into, as science journalist John Horgan 
described, a “bottomless phantasmagoria of baroque imagery.”30 FIGURE 4.5  Herbert W. Franke and Horst Helbig, Konforme Abbil -
dung,  1986. Courtesy of Herbert W. Franke.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 170
Like previous computer art, Neo-Platonic language was employed 
to describe the creation of fractals. Computer artist F. Kenton 
Musgrave, later to become a founding member of the Algorists, 
communicated the new-Platonic sensation and how fractals can be 
associated to Duchamp and his impact on contemporary art:
[T]hey have an ineffable sense of having existed a priori ; of 
somehow being inherent in the timeless, universal formal 
procedures that specify them and of always having existed there 
as an aspect of Nature, or at least Mathematics, just waiting to 
be discovered. As an artist, I simply interpret these forms visually. 
Thus they may represent, at least in part, “found art.”31
The biggest impact fractal geometry had on computer graphics 
was the representation of nature. Musgrave, a programmer for 
Mandelbrot at Yale, was the first to include fractal geometry 
persistently in his art. Mandelbrot credited Musgrave with being 
the “first true fractal-based artist.”32 Placing fractal imagery within 
a historical schema, Mandelbrot referred to three eras of fractal 
landscapes: the Heroic Era, the Classical Era, and the Romantic 
Era. The last era was characterized by Musgrave, whose “aesthetics 
and artistic self-expression come to the forefront in fractal 
landscapes.”33 Rather than to produce abstract geometric fractals 
which had dominated since the early 1980s, the artist used fractal 
geometry and stochastic generalizations to generate coastlines, 
oceans, and mountains. Much of the previous fractal imagery was 
generated by deterministic processes; however, when stochastic 
procedures were formulated, the imagery had a far more naturalistic 
impact. As a result, random fractal procedures were used to model 
landscapes and other natural phenomena in computer graphics. 
Calling on fractal geometry to render the surface appearance of 
nature, Musgrave’s landscape Blessed State  exhibits all the trends 
of fantasy and otherworldly landscapes of the era (Figure 4.6).
For the computer artist, the discourse of complexity was 
attractive  because it was another step in breaking the overt 
determinism of the machine. Culturally, chaos gave the machine 
a sense of mystery, overcoming the previous austere and rigid 
mechanistic perception of the computer. As had happened for the 
pioneers of computer art, the unpredictability of random procedures 
and the ability to generate sophisticated patterns from a simple 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 171
deterministic system became a central attraction. In the beginning, 
computer art emphasized stability, order, and uniformity. This was 
characterized by classical geometry with its lines and planes, circles 
and spheres, and triangles and cones which inspired a powerful sense 
of Platonic harmony. However, in the 1980s a metaphorical shift 
took place. Once the computer could model highly complex forms, 
the pictorial equilibrium of exact symmetries was broken. The 
new geometry mirrored the complex universe in its irregularities, 
unevenness, and distortion. Under the influence of the science of 
complexity, which started in the 1970s, computer art moved toward 
disorder, instability, diversity, and nonlinear relationships. Rigid 
aesthetics began to give way to organic and natural forms.
One of the most significant and celebrated computer artists 
Roman Verostko viewed his practice as a “dance between order 
and chaos.”34 Not since Lloyd Sumner had an artist brought such a 
strong spiritual and mystical dimension to his work.35 Like most of FIGURE 4.6  F. Kenton Musgrave, Blessed State,  1988. Courtesy of the 
artist.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 172
the pioneers, Verostko was deeply influenced by mathematics and 
publications such as Douglas Hofstadter’s influential book Gödel, 
Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid  (1979), which explored the 
new trends in the abstract sciences. Even prior to his engagement 
with the computational medium, Verostko investigated the “visual 
dialectic” between what he called “control and uncontrol.”36 In fact, 
Verostko’s exploration of order and chaos preceded much of the 
literature on the new theories. The artist’s early paintings presented 
visual opposites in a “kind of dialectic between order and chaos.”37 
Painting wooden panels with both ordered, formal shapes and 
spontaneous, gestural marks, Versotko attempted to represent the 
rational and irrational (or nonrational) within the same field, as in 
his pre-computer work New City 2  (Figure 4.7). Remarkably, other 
FIGURE. 4.7  Roman Verostko, New City 2,  ca. 1966. Acrylic with cray -
on and gesso on wood. Courtesy of the artist.

FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 173
artists yet to make the transition to computers were also exploring 
the relationship between determinism and free will, formal shapes, 
and gestural marks. When one places Verostko’s and Mohr’s pre-
computer paintings side-by-side, they exhibit striking similarities. 
In his painting Bild 1712/65 , Mohr distributed over his pictorial 
surface a combination of gestural and abstract mobile signs to create 
abstract visual tension, a method resembling that of Verostko’s 
(Figure 4.8). In their investigation of order and disorder, both artists 
would make the transition from painting to the digital medium.
Verostko also shared Mohr’s attachment to the constructivist 
tradition. More than any other computer artist, Verostko was 
acutely aware of the tradition in which his nonrepresentational art 
was situated. Verostko, who taught art history and who had been 
at one time an encyclopedist, often included the writings of modern 
abstract artists such as Piet Mondrian and Wassily Kandinsky 
while discussing his own work. The move toward nonobjective and 
FIGURE 4.8  Manfred Mohr, Bild 1712/65,  1965. Acrylic painting, 40.2 × 
49.2 in. Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 174
nonrepresentational art was for Verostko the most important legacy 
of twentieth-century art. Verostko viewed himself within the purest 
tradition of abstraction, which looked to construct art with an 
internal structure independent of any reference to objective reality. 
In this sense, Verostko was very much an orthodox modernist 
abstractionist. He also evoked the spiritual and mystical of much 
early modernism. For Verostko, art, like music, could be untethered 
from the “bonds of the material object,” which might provide a path 
to the spiritual.38 Kandinsky and Mondrian influenced Verostko’s 
thinking in this regard. It was Mondrian’s efforts to “create a visual 
dynamic equilibrium that could be viewed as a sign of an ultimate 
resolution of tensions between the vertical (the spiritual world) 
and the horizontal (earth, material world)” that produced the 
early dialectical paintings.39 Verostko was intending in his pictorial 
composition to balance the oppositional forces of chaos and order 
to create, as Mondrian described, “dynamic equilibrium.”40
The computer, with its mathematical basis, was a perfect 
instrument for unearthing a world of pure forms without reference to 
the visual vocabulary of the everyday world. The computer allowed 
the computer artist to treat abstract relations as visible, workable 
things. With the computer, the artist could explore visual abstraction 
in a dynamic, imaginative, and generative way. For Verostko, the 
computer expanded the capacity to visualize abstract structures as 
physical images. He saw the probe into visual abstraction as an 
inherited project from Klee, Mondrian, and Kandinsky. Like the 
modernists, Verostko viewed his experiments as crossing a “new 
threshold” in pursuit of the “unseen.”41 The artist explained:
These procedures opened a vast array of pure form, an 
uncharted frontier of unseen worlds waiting to be discovered 
and concretized. My ongoing work concentrates on developing 
my program of procedures, the score, for visualizing these forms. 
By joining these procedures with fine arts practice I create 
aesthetic objects to be contemplated much as we contemplate 
the wondrous forms of nature.42
Through his early exploration of stochastic behavior and free 
association within computing, Verostko decided to formulate a 
drawing/painting program that incorporated all that he had learned 
in his exploration into the visual dialectic. He went about embedding 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 175
stochastic and formal elements within a prescribed system for art-
making. Verostko’s tour de force  was a drawing and painting program 
called Hodos (meaning “path” or “road” in Greek) which could be 
continually modified by integrating and refining new programmatic 
routines. The “control and uncontrol” pictorial elements of his 
pre-computer painting are evident in the random lines and formal 
shapes of the Carnival  from the Pathway Series  (Figure 4.9). Here, 
ordered geometric shapes share the pictorial space with random lines 
and painted marks. Verostko’s most unique contribution to digital 
mark-making—his plotted brush stroke—makes its appearance in 
this work. This breakthrough, a result of his highly experimental 
work with the pen plotter, came when the artist attached a Chinese 
brush to the machine’s drawing arm and developed a sophisticated 
software routine to activate it. For the first time, the artist, who had 
studied the intricacies of Chinese and Japanese calligraphy, was able 
to achieve a stroke with a certain expressive energy, the dynamic 
form of the hand-drawn mark. Finally the cool rhetoric of the 
mechanical line with its exact precision gave way to a more organic, 
human sensibility. The line has the temperament of a human creator, 
a line of pure energy and freedom.
Verostko, in his spiritual quest, would continue to harness the 
power of the algorithm and its generative and harmonizing force. 
The computer, providing a “new pathway to making visible the 
invisible,” allowed one to probe the mysterious visual domains of 
nature’s underlying pattern, perhaps echoing the “processes lying 
at the core of the unfolding universe.”43 In the 1990s, the computer 
continued to be a vehicle for exploration; a machine that reached 
those inaccessible forms beyond the artist’s imagination.
Through the technosciences, the computer was imagined as a 
machine for designing worlds, an instrument for probing nature’s 
secrets, and a window onto new visual territories. The artist-
programmer paradigm developed along with these metaphors 
and mythologies. However, the computer now defied any single 
understanding and began to facilitate other expanded understandings. 
Shedding its aura of exaltation, it came to be understood as merely a 
tool among others—an instrument to be bent to the will of the user. 
Consequently, in the 1980s the computer entered the cultural field in 
a very different manner from the way it had been previously received. 
It became a personalized object, and perhaps more importantly it 
became a manageable medium for the neophyte.
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 176
Apart from the cultural populism of fractal geometry, the 
computer-generated image in the 1980s was entering popular culture 
through television, video games, print advertising, and feature 
films.44 It seemed as if overnight there was a proliferation of new 
dynamics and color computer graphics in the household. The general 
appreciation of the computer and its visual products contributed 
to a wider interest in computer art. Even though computer art 
lacked critical endorsement or a general acceptance within the fine FIGURE 4.9  Roman Verostko, Carnival,  Pathway Series,  1989. Algo -
rithmic pen and brush drawing, 24 × 40 in. Courtesy of the artist.

FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 177
art establishment, the computer art project managed to generate a 
substantial amount of interest in the field of visual culture. In 1987, 
the year the major exhibition and publication Digital Visions  was 
staged, Cynthia Goodman wrote that the “enthusiasm and interest 
with which fine artists are just now responding to the mention of 
computers is as profound as their disinterest and antagonism only a 
few years ago.”45 Although computer art expanded in the 1970s, its 
relative growth compared to video art and photography was small. 
While the 1970s were viewed as a negative period in computer art’s 
history, during the 1980s there was renewed optimism. Some reacted 
as if the computer had only recently arrived on the art scene. Jennifer 
Mellen called the computer an “astonishing new art medium,” one 
with “unprecedented promise.”46 Likewise, Prueitt, echoing the 
sentiment of the early 1970s, believed that there was a “revolution 
breaking” within the art world that may be as “profound” as the 
Renaissance.47 Prueitt felt that “someday the computer [would] be 
considered humanity’s finest artistic tool.”48 Apart from Prueitt’s 
overly celebratory publication Art and the Computer  (1984), there 
were several publications reflecting the newfound optimism in 
computer-based art, as well as a number of books published that 
outlined different methods people could use to create their own 
computer-generated artwork. Styled as manuals, the publications 
gave artists, who now had access to individual computers, 
information on the range and possibility of computer technology.
The enthusiasm for computer technology precipitated a 
growing tide of international exhibitions in galleries and museums. 
Another factor that increased the exposure and popularity of the 
computer was the number of mainstream artists flirting with 
the computer. In the 1980s, artists like Andy Warhol, David 
Hockney, Jenny Holzer, Keith Haring, Les Levine, and Bruce 
Nauman employed the image-making and manipulating power of 
the computer. This factor for Margot Lovejoy went some way in 
legitimizing the medium, as it proved that computers had “entered 
the studio of mainstream artists.”49 However, this point is often 
overemphasized, because the artist’s liaison with the computer 
was only brief for self-serving ventures. Technical difficulty saw 
many abandon the machine-based art for more reliable methods. 
The ones who persisted with computing technologies most often 
enlisted the help of technicians and programmers to construct the 
computational aspect of their work.
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 178
The most significant factor in the rejuvenation of computer art 
stemmed from the popularity of computer graphics and the growth 
of interest in computer science, which emerged like Hercules from 
its cradle. By the 1980s, computer science had become one of the 
most popular undergraduate majors in the United States. Computer 
graphics, by then a burgeoning field within computer science, also 
expanded dramatically. The growth of computer graphics had 
accelerated to the point where it was ubiquitous in visual culture, 
leading one commentator to suggest that it was “one of the most 
pervasive, influential forces in society.”50 The graphics community, 
which had swelled substantially since the mid-1970s, gave significant 
support to computer artists and their projects. There was a marked 
increase in research relating to computer art through the 1980s as well. 
At Ohio State University, one of the emerging centers for research in 
computers and art, there were many graduate projects investigating 
computer art issues. Previously the scientific and engineering 
community had given only partial acceptance to the computer art 
project. While computer artists in the 1970s found sympathy among 
scientists and technologists, people with whom they often closely 
worked, the scientific community was “often disinclined to regard art 
as a serious activity.”51 In contrast, the graphics community welcomed 
artists, primarily, as Mark Resch from SIGGRAPH suggests, for the 
profound “changes in perception and communication that result 
from artists using computers.”52 For Resch, computer graphics would 
not, however, impulsively support an “art for art’s sake” approach.53 
The artist needed to provide tangible results for further graphic 
application. Under SIGGRAPH exhibition conditions, there was 
no delineation between images produced by fine artists and those 
produced by computer scientists researching computer graphics. It 
was, and is still today, an exposition of new work emerging from 
the latest graphic engineering research. Much of the art pieces 
demonstrated the capability of new graphics software. As already 
mentioned, it was difficult to distinguish the computer artist from 
the computer scientist at many stages in the history of computer art. 
In the 1980s, the trend would continue with the graphics community 
securing members who were a blend of technologist and artist.
As the 1980s progressed, it became a commonly held 
preconception that computer artists found more “acceptance from 
the computer community than from the art community.”54 In the 
1980s, SIGGRAPH, which saw itself as a graphics technology 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 179
organization, became the most consistent supporter of computer art. 
In 1981, SIGGRAPH sponsored its first exhibition of computer art in 
combination with its annual computer graphics conference. Because 
of a limited budget and scope, the first exhibition, which mirrored the 
scale of previous computer art exhibitions, showed two-dimensional 
works that were easily transportable. While the first exhibition was 
a modest affair, existing as a minor sideshow to the latest research 
presentations, it allowed artists to develop the esprit de corps  of a 
relatively coherent group. From the perspective of the mainstream 
art world, however, the developing community appeared, as artist 
Rebecca Allen wryly described, to be the “computer art ghetto.”55 
Although other groups emerged and provided new exhibition spaces, 
such as Ars Electronica and ISEA, segregation from the orthodox art 
world continued to plague digital artists. Beyond becoming a kind 
of Salon des Refusés  for digital artists, these organizations continued 
to play a crucial supportive role, one in which a confederate of 
likeminded artists could share their abiding interests in emergent 
technology. Eventually, however, those institutions, along with the 
digital arts as a whole, emerged as a microcosm of the larger art world, 
reflecting similar hierarchical structures and modes of exclusivity.
Nevertheless, the annual SIGGRAPH conference was a crucial 
venue for computer artists. Because the “door to the art world was 
closed,” Allen explained, artists were required to “seek other venues” 
to show their computer art. By 1983, the computer art exhibition 
evolved into a traveling show. Over a two-year period, it was 
exhibited at 33 sites in America, Europe, and Asia. The importance 
of the exhibition was guaranteed by the overall popularity of the 
conference. Coupled with the intense interest in the new graphic 
imagery, the SIGGRAPH Art Show in 1987 attracted 23,000 over 
the weeklong conference. As a result, the art show became a major 
site for the exhibition of computer art and a place for the artist to 
gain new insight into current technical achievements in computer 
graphics. However, as outlined in the last chapter, computer art’s 
close relationship with the graphics industry was also a key factor 
in its marginalization.
Beyond the support of the computer industry, the most important 
factor that contributed to new interest in computer art was the 
arrival of the personal computer. With the advent of the powerful 
and affordable microprocessor, the computer was available on an 
individual basis. Peripheral output devices also fell in price. This 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 180
meant that printers and plotters were also personally available to the 
aspiring computer artist, though still costly investments. Artists now 
had a fully contained image-making machine which, importantly, 
was not linked to any large institution. In the early 1980s Mark 
Wilson was one of the first traditionally trained artists to purchase 
a microcomputer with the intention of generating computer art. 
With personal computers, other artists such as Edward Zajec and 
Jean-Pierre Hébert began working outside large institutions. Earlier, 
computer artists had been required to work within the confines and 
restrictions of large institutions, which became problematic as the 
corporate environment was often at odds with the artists’ vision.
With the increasing processing power of the computer and its 
color graphic capabilities, computer art became visually more 
sophisticated. Nevertheless, while there was new, more synthetic 
3-D imagery produced, the computer art’s traditional idiomatic form 
of linear graphics remained popular, as in Melvin Prueitt’s work. 
Paralleling the elemental line drawings of the original computer 
artworks, Prueitt’s Roadway to Somewhere  (Figure 4.10) generated 
FIGURE 4.10  Melvin Prueitt, Roadway to Somewhere,  1981. © 1981 
Melvin L. Prueitt.

FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 181
subtle spatial relationships and planar effects with recurring lines, 
soft curves, and, now, color. As the title suggests, computer imagery 
was conceptualized as an unexplored universe. Increasingly through 
the 1980s, figures and landscapes of computer art are set in a vacuous 
black space akin to the spatially immeasurable universe. In addition, 
the preoccupation with symmetry, which had been an adjunct to 
the work of the pioneers, was also evident in Prueitt’s Involution  
(Figure 4.11). The figure was generated by joining together a number 
of quadrilaterals and triangles and then filling in each shape with 
linear spirals. Again, the appeal to Pythagorean and Platonic ideas of 
beauty remained a constant element within computer art aesthetics.
The spatial register, or vector space, continued to underpin the 
geometric abstraction of the 1980s. Linear and geometric figuration 
became a sort of “classical” computer art. Likewise, the constructivist 
movement, which remained a central influence for the artists of the 
1960s and 1970s, continued to influence computer artists well into 
the 1980s. Mark Wilson, who had been an active painter in New 
FIGURE 4.11  Melvin Prueitt, Involution,  1978. © 1978 Melvin L. Prueitt.

WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 182
York in the 1970s and had exhibited widely in the United States 
and Europe, maintained a connection with constructivism. Beyond 
generating constructivist characteristics of line and plane, Wilson 
hoped to discover a wholly original style from the use of computers. 
As with Mohr, Cohen, and Molnar, Wilson’s pre-computer paintings 
bear a distinct resemblance to his computer art. In his pre-computer 
painting Untitled  (Figure 4.12), the abstract formation has the 
appearance of an electronic or digital circuit board. Wilson was 
intrigued by the visual beauty and complexity of chip diagrams 
and circuit boards. Although his paintings represented the interiors 
of technological artifacts, when he employed the computer, his 
work—paradoxically—evolved toward a more neutral and abstract 
position, as seen in his Skew J17  (Figure 4.13). Floating circles, 
FIGURE 4.12  Mark Wilson, Untitled,  1973. Acrylic on canvas. Courtesy 
of the artist.

FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 183
with intricate radial lines moving from the circle’s center to its 
perimeter, overlap with similar forms in space. The segments in 
each semicircular shape remind us of the wedge-shaped sections, 
the cunei , of ancient Greek amphitheaters or maybe they mirror the 
schematics of data segments on a computer’s hard-drive disk. The 
artist’s colors, all generated randomly, burn with a plastic intensity, 
fully resonating the artificiality of synthetic forms.
By the 1980s, the plotter, like the vector-based graphics, had 
become the orthodox imaging tool for artist-programmers. Wilson 
called the plotter the “most venerable device” to have been used 
in the service of computer art.56 The plotter’s significance was its 
embodiment of automatism in the art-making process. Because 
plotters follow vector graphic instructions directly, which means 
that lines are drawn from one point to another simulating hand 
drawing, the plotter possessed the mystical dimension of the 
Enlightenment automata. Once the algorithm was initiated, the 
artist could retreat and watch the machinery create the artwork 
(see Mohr, figure 3.8). As with Mohr’s and Cohen’s exhibitions, the 
audience was captivated by the manner in which the pen executed 
the lines in the same way that the human hand draws.
In contrast to the other display peripherals, the plotter enabled 
the artist to introduce traditional media into computer art. The 
plotter had the ability to accommodate high-quality traditional fine 
art materials like Arches paper and Indian ink. The traditional rag 
paper had desirable textures and, importantly, was archival. Having FIGURE 4.13  Mark Wilson, Skew J17,  1984. Plotter drawing, 22 × 38 in. 
Courtesy of the artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 184
an advantage over other computer art forms, plotter drawings could 
be easily identified and assimilated by art historians, critics, and 
gallery owners into traditional art structures. As Franke suggested, 
the easiest method of acceptance within the modalities of the gallery 
was to produce editions of static pictures on paper.57 The plotter 
finally gave the computer a sustained form of representation, while 
conversely previous computer art had required other modes of 
technology for representation, which had physical and financial 
limitations. Even the new raster screens within CGI graphic format 
had limited the quality of the image. In contrast, the pen plotter 
allowed 1,000 increments to the inch, which had a higher resolution 
than the computer monitor. With their superior resolution, the 
plotters allowed for those subtle nuances and tempered qualities 
achieved only with human hand movement. Importantly, for artists 
like Verostko, the plotter could build color tones and drifting fields 
through multiple layers of lines (Figure 4.9). A single layer of pixels 
in raster graphics could not achieve Versotko’s unique glazing effect 
and visual drift, which was formed by the physical overlapping of 
colored inks.
Perhaps the greatest exponent of the intricately complex plotted 
line is Jean-Pierre Hébert. In 1959, Hébert, who was studying 
engineering at the time, began using the first IBM computer 
installed at the company’s headquarters in Paris, France. While 
Hébert became one of the earliest computer consultants, moving 
to the United States in the 1980s to be at the cutting edge of the 
computer industry, he remained committed to the visual arts, 
eventually dedicating his life to computer arts. His love of art was 
nurtured early. Seeking refuge from the war and Nazi persecution, 
Hébert’s mother took her son to live on his grandfather’s estate in 
the Vence, the medieval-walled village at the foothills of the French 
Alps. Vence had a rich artistic heritage, particularly for modern art. 
The town is commonly known for the Matisse Chapel (Chapelle 
du Rosaire de Vence), which was built and decorated by Matisse 
as a gift to the Dominican nuns who helped the artist recuperate 
after illness. At different times, modern masters made Vence their 
home, including Marc Chagall and Max Ernst. Picasso’s Madoura 
pottery studio in Vallauris was nearby, and because the town was in 
the orbit of Picasso’s playground, the French Riviera, Hébert would 
often see Picasso on the beach. Many of the modernists showed their 
art in the famed Galerie Chave, a gallery named after its founder 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 185
Alphonse Chave, a figure who became prominent in Hébert’s life. 
Pierre Chave, Alphonse’s son, held Hébert’s first solo show at the 
Chave Gallery in 1989. Entitled Sans Lever La Plume  (Without 
Lifting the Pen), the exhibition showcased some of Hébert’s most 
finely rendered computer-generated plotted works.
Works like Vent Noir II  (Figure 4.14) illustrated the power of 
Hébert’s programming and the subtly to which the artist was able 
to apply the unique capabilities of the computer-guided plotter. In 
the late 1980s, quite divorced from the computer art movement 
and more remote from the mainstream art world, Hébert began 
completing some of the most exact and complicated single-line 
drawings ever completed. Like much of Hébert’s art, Vent Noir II  
FIGURE 4.14  Jean-Pierre Hébert, Vent Noir II,  1987. © 1987 Jean-
Pierre Hébert. Courtesy of the Artist.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 186
is made up of one finely rendered line that when viewed in total 
creates an intricate tapestry, a kind of translucent topology that 
mirrors the effect of light passing through a permeable membrane. 
To generate this linear configuration required years of painstaking 
work in which the artist, through trial and error, found the most 
suitable plotter, pens, and inks to support the process. Some of his 
larger more complex works would take over 60 hours to plot, which, 
for the artist who remained without sleep, became mentally and 
physically exhausting. Any impurity in the ink could clog the pen, 
or the risk of a power outage was ever-present. If a problem arose 
the printer would fail and because the design was reliant on the 
single, unending line, no retracing or starting from the same point 
was possible. Three weeks of preparation would be for naught, and 
the artist would need to start again. While the process of watching 
the plotter plot was “magically rewarding,” the whole thing being 
a “fascinating performance,” the mental exhaustion from knowing 
that “at any second, the whole thing could collapse” transformed 
the artist, as he said himself, into a “nervous wreck.”58 Art critics 
were largely oblivious to such technical hardships.
For most of the artist-programmers, the plotter—though difficult 
to master—embodied the most important features of computer 
art. Beyond its essential link to programmatic automatism, the 
plotter had associations to fine art through the traditions of 
drawing, printmaking, and general materiality. However, just when 
computer art seemed on a solid foundation, computer technology 
rapidly transformed. The most fundamental shift in computer art 
production was the development, then refinement, of the computer 
interface. The Graphical User Interface (GUI), which was developed 
in the late 1960s, humanized the computer by allowing the 
individual (now called “user”) to navigate the computer’s systems 
using familiar art metaphors and icons. Importantly, the user did 
not have to wrestle with the internal structures of the machine, such 
as its complex symbolic and command-line system.
Since the late 1960s, computer scientists had been developing 
systems that hid the complexities of the computer—to essentially 
free the artistic elements from the mathematical and programmatic 
components. In the 1970s, many software engineers and artists 
worked on art-based graphic programs and interfaces that would 
evolve into the paint system, electronic palettes, and image 
synthesizers of the 1980s. Effectively, the new interfaces within 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 187
painting software rendered the computer monitor a window onto 
a simulated canvas. For the first time, the computer now embodied 
traditional media and its processes. Therefore, artists could approach 
the computer with their visual arts training intact without requiring 
recondite computer programming knowledge. For the first time, the 
computer artists would not necessarily need to script or prefigure 
their art ideas into algorithmic form.
This precipitated two methodologies within computer art: the 
conceptual basis for the artwork with its traditional algorithmic 
imperatives and the operational process, which used the computer 
as a tool for specific results. While many of the artist-programmers 
preferred to draw and modify pictorial elements by scripting 
changes in a nonvisual form, the new breed of computer artists 
employed all of the gesture-based activity innate to traditional 
media. The artist, by using the computer as a physical tool with all 
of the real-time virtuosity of traditional media, was involved closely 
in the visual production of the work. Yet the consequences of the 
interactive visual interface were that the artist had little conscious 
understanding to the underlying structure of the computer and its 
processes. The interface allowed the artist to work in a nonlinear 
fashion; effectively intervening in the visual data at any point in the 
process. In contrast, the abstracting methods of the programmer 
distanced the artist from the visual outcome.
With this new development, the computer became a creative 
partner rather than an autonomous art machine. In part, the shift 
was due to changing perceptions of the computer as a universal 
and protean machine. Apart from the change in interface and the 
move toward screen-based information, the 1980s witnessed digital 
technology that combined sound, text, and image. Previously, the 
fields of computers, telecommunications, and audiovisuals developed 
independently. However, in the 1980s, areas of high technology 
converged through different multimedia formats that allowed the 
processing of visual information in a number of ways, including an 
interchange between analog and digital systems. Increasingly, art 
was understood in terms of a database or data structure that was 
permanently flexible. For the new computer artists, the computer’s 
power lay in its ability to make the image infinitely malleable. For 
Joan Truckenbrod, the computer represented a multidimensional 
imaging system that opened up the possibilities of a rich variety 
of artistic activity through a convergence of media: the “computer 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 188
becomes the hub of a multifaceted imaging network, involving 
visual, acoustic, performance, and experiential ‘images.’”59
The idea of the computer as an “expanded medium” had been 
implicit in Schwartz’s practice since the late 1960s when she was a 
pioneering artist at Bell Labs. By integrating both digital and analog 
media, traditional practice and advanced technology, Schwartz 
employed the computer as a polymorph of tools. Her achievements 
and awards in computer animation are well documented. Her role in 
promoting a new kind of artistic intentionality—a direct approach 
that manipulated the image at the level of the pixel—led in new 
directions. Now computer art was not just a cerebral exercise, but 
became a bodily ritual and a sensory experience. Having formal 
training in art allowed Schwartz to see the computer’s potential as 
a universal image machine: a consortium of tools that could mimic 
traditional media. Expanding the medium beyond specialized 
programs, Schwartz “inputted” her ideas through the mouse, 
joystick, and keyboard. Her desire to move beyond the linear process 
of programming and manipulate the image at the level of the pixel 
led her to a remarkable career in the computer-aided analysis and 
electronic restoration. Her research into perspectives in Leonardo’s 
Last Supper  and her analysis of the continuity of proportion between 
the Leonardo self-portrait drawing and the painted Mona Lisa  were 
both widely acclaimed. The now iconic computer art piece Mona/
Leo (Figure 4.15) matches (in a postmodernist act of appropriation 
reminiscent of the work of Sherry Levine and others) the same 
frame half of Mona Lisa’s face with that of Leonardo’s. The digital 
alteration commented on the irony and hidden meaning of the two 
figures’ physiognomic similarities. The irony is doubled upon when 
considering both the role of Leonardo as an icon in computer art 
and the often obscured role of women in the computer art field.
Schwartz’s combinations of different media technologies and 
her successful intermixing of different artistic techniques made her 
practice a model for future new media art. Schwartz effectively 
ignored computer art’s modernist impulse to rigorously delimit 
and define the art form. The trend toward the computer as a 
multifaceted, dynamic, screen-based medium was confirmed by 
technology-based international art events. The SIGGRAPH art 
exhibition became more complex as it included environmental, 
interactive, online, and traditional computer artworks. From the 
mid-1980s, international art and technology exhibitions became 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 189
ever more ambitious with exhibitions presenting live performances 
coupled with the latest technologies such as 3-D laser projections. 
By 1987, the SIGGRAPH exhibition had grown large enough to 
warrant five categories: abstract, visual research, human image, 
graphic design, and landscape.FIGURE 4.15  Lillian Schwartz, Mona/Leo,  1987. © 1987 Lillian F. 
Schwartz.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 190
For Schwartz, the “qualitative sensations of the creative act 
remain the elusive domain of the artist.”60 Even though the computer 
was a powerful tool in the analysis of art, the artist, as author and 
originator, held the primary position. Although we can employ 
the computer to gain insight and improve our comprehension of 
artists’ methodology, Schwartz asserted that “we will never parse 
[the artists’] inspiration into a set of rules or an algorithm.”61 
Here, Schwartz warns against the narrowness of the conceptual 
programming approach:
Knowing a programming language and then writing a program 
using that language can lead to a creative isolation for an artist, 
because the birth of the program (often followed by the need 
to tinker with it over the years) displaces the artistic act. The 
program becomes the artwork, and the fontanelle through 
which creativity has previously surged unimpeded becomes 
impenetrably blocked … I did not have the desire to write a 
program from scratch or to spend time afterward scrutinizing 
each line of code to make it more efficient.62
For the nonprogramming computer artists, the immediate nature 
of the computer interface, with its direct link between the artist’s 
hand and the screen, increased experimental interplay. Using 
a combination of tools and filters, the artist could perform 
nonlinear actions on the image. The flexibility and universality of 
the medium is what attracted the Pop artist Andy Warhol to the 
commercially available Amiga system. One of the main features 
of the metaphorical interface was its multifunctionality, which for 
Warhol meant artists did not need to alter their own style. Software 
programs effectively established continuity with the artists’ previous 
way of working. The computer’s power of allure, which had once 
been closely coupled with the seduction of programming, became 
tied to the appeal of the interface. As Sherry Turkle suggested, the 
artist as a “user” was involved with the “machine in a hands-on 
way” and was not interested in the technology, “except as it enables 
an application.”63 The artist-programmers were the antithesis of 
users; they, like the computer hacker, were “passionately involved 
in the mastery of the machine itself.”64 Their intimate relationship 
with the machines was sustained by the joy of fully comprehending 
a complex system and being able to reconfigure it at will. As Turkle 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 191
proposed, the new user-friendly interface “encouraged users to stay 
at a surface level of visual representation,” effectively working in 
ignorance of the underlying digital system.65
Although Cohen’s autogenic practice was still gaining 
widespread popularity, the days when the program was merely set 
in motion were long gone. With real-time interfaced art-making 
software available, the interactive and intuitive engagement began 
to dominate. Not all welcomed the computer interface and screen-
based practice made possible by new commercial software systems. 
Many from the artist-programming tradition resisted the new 
technological transparency, which the computer world increasingly 
celebrated. While many traditionalists had predicted the further 
expanding of the medium, many could not foresee that computer 
systems would facilitate the integration of sound, images, and text 
through multimedia interface. As these new modes developed, 
interaction became one of the primary paradigms through which 
to understand computer art. The interactive mediation between 
medium, artist, and participator, which the computer facilitated, 
was trumpeted as the new progressive form. Many believed that 
if computer art had a future it would be dynamic and interactive.
As early as 1976, Edward Zajec felt that the current static 
computer art was a discrete element in a transition stage: “they stand 
as stills in a process in motion and fall short of realizing the full 
potential of the medium.”66 Others also believed that all static art, 
including art produced by computers, left the audience “unsatisfied” 
and was somehow “incomplete.”67 Zajec felt that computer art was 
moving away from object-oriented art toward “direct interactive 
exchange.”68 This trend was confirmed by Franke’s article “The 
Expanding Medium,” in which he saw computer art moving from 
the “small, limiting frame of a picture” to a “comprehensive image 
of an environment or world.”69
The movement toward a more sensual, interactive, and 
synaesthetic environment diverged increasingly from the normative 
paradigm of the artist-programmers, who had been preoccupied 
with mathematically configured spatial form and pattern within 
their individualized art-making systems. As the 1980s developed, 
critics and artists alike were beginning to delineate the different 
modes of computer art practice. By the mid-1980s, computer art 
began to splinter into two competing approaches. The schism that 
emerged was, as Donald Michie and Rory Johnston described, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 192
“every bit as vehement as the rivalry between painters and sculptors 
in Titian’s day.”70 Although this appears to be an exaggeration, the 
disjuncture was clearly visible in computer art discourse. The artist-
programmer paradigm was under threat from the now ubiquitous 
software applications that allowed the artist to employ the computer 
in the manner of a traditional medium.
As computer art dichotomized into competing paradigms, 
hostilities began to surface from the old order. For the traditional 
artist-programmers, the prefabricated software had a number of 
disadvantages. Artists who worked with commercially available 
computer software had to accept the limitations of the system, 
adjusting their style to the machine’s capabilities. This required no 
change in perception or method to use the system, and thus no new 
understanding of the computational potential. Artist-programmers 
felt that the new computer artist was using the computer for 
the “sake of novelty” rather than exploiting the “unique visual 
characteristic” of the computer, as Preusser described it.71 For Roger 
Malina, compared with the works of artists who designed their own 
programs, such as Cohen and Verostko, commercial software and 
particular hardware embedded a recognizable “signature” in the 
artist’s work.72 Likewise, the aesthetician and computer art theorist 
Mihai Nadin felt that commercial software left a diminishing mark 
on the art. He believed that computer software controlled the artist 
by its specific parameters, which resulted in what he deprecatingly 
termed “canned art.”73 In addition, the computer’s ability to simulate 
other art styles and processes with relative ease and speed produced 
a fast substitute for art, which he called “MacDonald art.”74
Purism developed among the artist-programmers, who saw their 
programmatic technique as the only possible path for generating 
computer art. For Musgrave, the algorithmic imperative was 
the purest form within computer art. Programmed computer 
art is different from traditional art mediums because details 
cannot be manipulated in isolation from the whole. In contrast, 
programmed art “changes the global parameters immediately and 
directly affects everything.”75 For Michie and Johnston, the “tool” 
approach, exemplified by David Em, was dismissed as “painting by 
numbers.”76 For Nadin, the commercial computer program gave a 
“prefabricated, general solution” to the process of art making.77 
The artist was a mere user confined and determined by a program 
constructed by others, and the only way to overcome the governing 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 193
aspects of the commercial program was to construct the program 
oneself, to have in effect a blank computer. This, Nadin felt, was 
necessary to make distinctions between personally programmed 
computer art and art created through the commercial programs. 
One needed to establish the emerging aesthetics in terms of the 
idiomatic visual form of the computer: “It is in the realm of what 
was not before possible that one can see the assets of this artistic 
involvement with technology.”78
Under this conception, the program was the work of art. This 
echoes the previous emphasis on the program by Franke, who 
in 1971 commented on the copyright problem of computer art, 
reiterating that it was not the “individual productions but the 
programs that are the real results of creative activity.”79 For Nadin, 
there was no such thing as a “computer artist who is not the author 
of his or her program.”80 “The very few successes we know of 
are,” he said, “the result of authentic mastery of the programming 
and the result of the attempt to create a legitimate alternative 
medium.”81 The high profile artist Harold Cohen had also insisted 
publicly on the need to program.82 For most of the orthodox, the 
program constructed by the artists would evolve over time and have 
in it the embedded recognizable characteristics of the artist, which 
commercially available art package programs lacked. Mirroring 
previous mythology surrounding the priesthood of the machine, 
Prueitt believed that “only the programmers can fully see the beauty 
of their work,” and computer art had a secret depth that could only 
be perceived by those with deep knowledge of computation.83
The purists felt that the new software failed to bring anything new 
to computer art discourse, settling instead to simulate traditional 
media. While there was a preoccupying attempt to define what 
computer art was, the significant factor in the antagonism was the 
mind/body duality that ran through computer art discourse. The 
artist-programmers privileged the cognitive faculty and rationality, 
while the artist using painting software injected the body, via 
movement and manual dexterity, into computer art. For scientists 
like Prueitt, the computer was significant because it dispensed with 
the need for the body in art. Overcoming the need for manual 
dexterity, one could extract any vision from the mind. The computer 
enabled the virtual embodiment or visualization of embedded 
mental forms because within the “soul dwell masterpieces of artistic 
creation that cannot get out.”84 For these scientists, the body is an 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 194
impediment and barrier to the forms of the mind.
With the inundation of off-the-shelf software and the new 
dynamic, interactive digital modes emerging, the computer art 
project began to fragment. Computer art came under attack from 
both external and internal figures. In 1983, art critic Grace Glueck 
wrote in the New York Times  an article entitled “Portrait of the 
Artist As a Young Computer,” again a reworking of James Joyce’s 
title as well as a parallel to the first article that pushed computerized 
art into the realm of popular culture: John R. Pierce’s 1965 Playboy  
article entitled “Portrait of the Machine As a Young Artist.”85 She 
opened her essay with this salvo:
Given what we’ve seen of it to date, it’s small wonder that 
when we hear the term “computer art” our attention begins to 
wander. By now we’ve developed an understandable resistance 
to the boring optical shenanigans that result when computers 
are programmed to make drawings by technicians who lack the 
imagination of artists.86
Critics were still highly uncomfortable with the technologist as 
creator. Yet the term “naïve practitioner,” which was employed to 
deride the scientists and technologists since the 1960s, ironically 
became a term used to describe the new computer artists who had a 
superficial understanding of the computer and its internal systems.
Like his fellow programming artists, Cohen expressed a passionate 
disdain for what he referred to as “off-the-shelf” software. Cohen 
could see that the production of this software and its particular 
technological mode, which confirmed quick-changing and new 
characteristics, resulted in an overt attraction for the superficial and 
the novel. Inevitably the artist would be associated with a product 
inexplicably linked to the future-oriented economy of new digital 
technology. Even so, Cohen did not spare artist-programmers 
from his criticism. For Cohen, computer art more generally lacked 
any inspiration or ingenuity. This was the reason why, as Cohen 
suggested, computer art had “failed to stir the imagination of 
serious critics … [or] … any part of the serious art community.”87 He 
went on to conclude that he had “never met a computer artist who 
didn’t think that most computer art has been extremely dreary.”88 
For Cohen, computer art was “old-fashioned … simple-minded 
and boring.”89 This sentiment reflects a common preoccupation 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 195
among computer artists who exhibited a propensity to dismiss the 
majority of computer art as insipid and aesthetically repetitious. Art 
theorist Rudolf Arnheim also noted that contemporary computer 
art seemed surprisingly unsophisticated when one considered 
the effort, knowledge, and techniques required to produce it. As 
Arnheim noted, there was “frequently a pathetic discrepancy 
between the sophistication of the program fed into the computer 
and the simplism of the visual results.”90
Apart from the continuing debate over computer art’s 
questionable aesthetics, the computer remained a target of 
technophobes. Even though the computer had been accepted 
culturally as a symbol for a new technological liberation, the art 
community, which was incessantly humanistic, found the computer 
and the art produced by it irreconcilable. In many respects, little 
had changed since the emergence of the computer as an art 
medium in the late 1960s. Traditional artists, like the early critics, 
were still “suspicious of technology,” finding it perpetually “cold 
and hostile.”91 Glueck, who seemed to praise the work of Harold 
Cohen, asked the question that had dogged computer art since its 
inception: “Doesn’t the idea of a technical apparatus doing the work 
vitiate the whole concept of art as a unique product of the creative 
imagination?”92 Prejudice was also widespread in art educational 
institutions, which offered only limited educational options in the 
visual arts for those who wanted to explore the computer as an art 
tool or medium. Computer artists who became educators constantly 
expressed the resentment that colleagues from traditional art 
departments exhibited. Within commercial galleries and museums, 
too, the practice of ignoring computer art was still in effect. Many 
curators and gallery directors were still, as Timothy Binkley 
described, “skeptical” about the validity of computer-assisted 
art.93 Even in West Germany, one of the originating computer art 
countries, resistance to computer art remained in many quarters. 
In 1985, an application was filed with the exhibition commission 
of the BBK in Munich to exhibit computer art. The exhibition was 
to address some of the theoretical issues concerning the art form. 
The published catalog brought together a number of important 
essays by both contemporary artists and the founding scientists, 
such as Bense and Franke. In spite of this, the original discussion 
concerning the application “exposed prejudices and uncertainty 
with respect to new [computational] media.”94
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 196
Support from the computer industry itself was conditional 
and rather limited. Even IBM, which established a research and 
development center in La Gaude in southeastern France, only 
offered limited support to Hébert, an individual who had worked 
at IBM in the very first stages of the computer industry in France. 
While they allowed Hébert to exhibit works at the research center at 
La Gaude, which was organized by Pierre Chave, IBM did not buy 
any of the works. Describing how tough it was in the 1980s, Hébert 
reflected that not only was there resistance from the art community 
toward the computer, but those who did support computing, such 
as IBM, did not “respect computer art” enough to support the 
career of artists.95
In the 1980s there was still a prosaic technophobia running 
through the arts community. As Franke attested:
One of the reasons for the rejection of computer art could be 
that it is being produced with the help of a highly technical 
medium, a medium very much under cross-fire today. Interceding 
in favor of technology as a legitimate means of creating art, 
means confronting the question of whether or not, in a world 
where technological progress itself has become dubious, art at 
least should be kept free of machines.96
Even though there was a proliferation of futurologist publications 
advocating the positive impact of computing on society, a number 
of humanists attempted to describe the technological inspired 
writing as utopian fantasy. Social commentators such as Theodore 
Roszak wanted to debunk “the cultlike mystique” that surrounded 
the computer.97 In The Cult of Information  (1986), Roszak 
concentrated his critique on the “folklore” regarding the “images 
of power” and the “illusion of well-being” that had “grown up 
around the machine.”98 His principal target was the concept of 
information, which had become inextricably linked to technology 
in the public mind. While Roszak freely admitted that there was an 
“obvious humanist agenda running through the critique,” he found 
it necessary to urgently investigate the politics and technology of 
information against what he had called in previous publications 
the technocratic political agenda and the position of doctrinaire 
technophilia.99 Even so, Roszak’s vocal criticism was a distant voice 
among the flood of futurist publications of the era that trumpeted 
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 197
the immense power of the computer. The humanist critiques of 
technology, which reached an apogee in the 1960s and 1970s, 
declined in the conservatism of the 1980s. Culturally, the world 
had come to terms with the computer’s ubiquitousness.
Even with cultural acceptance of the computer, computer art 
failed to flourish. The predominant belief was that the computer 
and its art form were immature, even though in the mid-1970s 
a number of commentators felt that computer art had emerged 
from its experimental stage and approached a phase of maturity. A 
decade later, Franke believed that computer art was still in its initial 
stages of development, a sentiment that Youngblood also shared. 
Many believed, as with the history of photography, that there 
would be a significant period before legitimization. Even by the late 
1990s, the computer as an artistic medium had, according to many 
commentators, not reached maturation. The artist and writer Paul 
Brown constructed a historical model to predict the time it would 
take before the computer as a medium matured: “Forty years is 
precisely the time it takes for a technology to mature and, more 
importantly, for a new generation of artists to develop who haven’t 
been influenced by the previous paradigm.”100
Some believed that the rapid and continual progress of digital 
technology and its essential protean character prevented the artist 
from reflecting on the subtleties of the process. The technology 
was simply evolving too fast for an artistic tradition that could 
only change slowly and in relation to broad social and cultural 
movements. Also, as Franke suggested, the graphic software of 
scientists and engineers had been the “pacesetter for art,” and the 
position was now progressively being taken over by commercial 
interests in entertainment and marketing.101 Csuri and other 
artists such as Rebecca Allen had already developed important 
graphic applications that were increasingly employed in television, 
advertising, and filmmaking. At the close of the 1970s, Negroponte 
anticipated the changing trend toward ubiquitous computer-
generated graphics. With predictive acuity, he wrote that the “major 
impact of computers in the visual arts will be on our daily lives, not 
necessarily on high and fine art.”102
Indeed some of computer art’s problems were associated with 
the common belief that it was merely an adjunct to computer 
graphics. In the early 1980s, computer art was, as Noll wrote, still 
“tied to the computer community.”103 Youngblood believed that 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 198
the “full aesthetic potential” of computer art would be realized 
“only when computer artists come to instruments from art 
rather than computer science.”104 Many believed that artists were 
seduced by the race to develop realistic simulation, what Franke 
called “illusion technology.”105 The challenge to generate images 
that appear realistic became the holy grail of computer graphics. 
Franke felt that the development toward a perfect simulation of 
reality was related only “marginally to the problems of art” and 
that graphic realism was associated with “problems of leisure 
time and entertainment.”106 Roger Malina agreed with this trend, 
adding that “the fantastic landscapes produced using the most 
advanced computer graphics systems reveal the use of no new 
tools by the artists and no visual languages that were not already 
available to the surrealists over half a century ago.”107 Although 
Em’s images met with initial success, expressing the novelty of 
synthetic realities, some felt that they lacked semantic meaning. 
For example, Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh believed that 
computer art was far too intertwined with the emblems of popular 
science:
Sometimes an initial reaction of elation, shock, mystery, whatever, 
comes from the unusual texture or color, from the juxtaposition 
of elements, or from the creation of superreal objects. Often 
the underlying iconography hints at a strange and wonderful 
world of the future that will be brought about by science and 
technology, a message which after two hundred years is rather 
trite.108
As the 1980s progressed, the term “computer art” came under 
increasing attack. For Mark Wilson, the problem was in the term’s 
inclusiveness: any image made via the computer was termed 
art. Wilson felt that the “semantic confusion” persisted into the 
1980s.109 Many computer art exhibitions and organizations (such 
as the Computer Art Society) had an inclusive policy that made 
no distinction between artist, technologist, and scientist. There was 
a tendency, as Nicholas Lambert suggested, “to treat everything 
claimed as ‘Computer Art’ too reverentially” through “fear of 
dissuading further experiments with adverse criticism.”110 The result 
was that “mediocre pieces of graphical work” were “promoted as 
art regardless” of conventional understandings of art.111
FRONTIER  EXPLORATION 199
Equally, many had questioned the legitimacy of trained scientists 
and technologists calling themselves artists. Scientists, although 
having no training in the arts and deriving no income from their 
artistic practice, comfortably assumed the title. The legendary 
computer scientist Blinn declared “he could now term himself 
an ‘artist’ because that term was effectively bestowed upon him 
through the artistic recognition of his work.”112
The term “computer art” also became incompatible with the 
current diversity of technology. Finding the term too narrow, 
Truckenbrod preferred the term “computer-aided” art.113 
Increasingly the term “computer art” was exchanged for others, 
such as “computer-assisted art” which, like “computer-aided art,” 
shifted the computer from the center of practice and oriented it 
toward its secondary place as a mere tool. The computer assisted in 
production and became a facilitator, rather than being the intrinsic 
element of production. Likewise, artists themselves increasingly 
resisted being termed “computer artists.” Mohr, Cohen, and Em felt 
that the term unnecessarily stereotyped them in the eyes of the art 
community and public.
As early as 1981, the Japanese artist Yoichiro Kawaguchi started 
to designate the products of his practice as “digital art.”114 In the 
1990s, this term became ascendant, but before then, there was a raft 
of substitute terms that gave a more descriptive account of computer 
art methodology. What triggered the splintering of computer art 
into a myriad of terms was a crisis of confidence in the closing years 
of the 1980s. The new perceptions and designations that emerged 
during that time constitute the central theme of the next chapter.
In the mid-1980s, computer art historian Goodman stated that: 
“Before being accepted unquestioningly as a legitimate artistic 
medium, some of the challenging aesthetic and philosophical issues 
raised by computer-generated art must be solved.”115 Yet by the 
second half of the 1980s there were was no definable consensus 
on what theoretical approach should underpin computer art. 
Although computer art continued to grow in the 1980s and reach a 
populist audience, boosted by a nascent graphics industry and the 
enculturation of the computer-generated image, there was simmering 
discontent among computer artists. To compound problems, 
computer technology had significantly shifted toward universal 
and mainstream users, which effectively rendered the orthodox 
artist-programmer redundant. Bemoaning the commercialization of 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 200
computer art, orthodox computer artists found new ways to define 
their art and add to the rhetorical debate over what constituted 
computer art. The irreconcilable differences between two computer 
art paradigms, the rise of critical postmodern theory, and the 
further expanding of the computer as a medium contributed to 
unprecedented instability within computer art discourse.
Nevertheless, critical theory brought a new understanding 
of technology, one that envisaged the computer as a democratic 
instrument and subversive of modernist conventions. The computer 
as the ultimate manipulator of the image would no longer be an 
anathema to artistic values. Nevertheless, configuring computer 
art according to postmodern criticality had its contradictions. 
With extensive links to modernist ideology, computer art naturally 
resisted reformulation. The next chapter explores computer 
art’s search for theory and content from the different discourses 
operating at the close of the 1980s. It will show how competing 
ideologies extracted various themes and histories from computer 
art discourse and used them to construct newer more palatable 
narrative. For example, the postmodernists applied the history of 
computer art to the formation of the digital art paradigm, and the 
exponents of technoscience removed essentialist concepts such as 
the algorithm from their new art forms. As the following chapter 
argues, this effectively left computer art as an amorphous and 
fragmented movement.
The year 1989 was pivotal in the history of computer art. Two 
crucial proceedings took place: the annual SIGGRAPH conference 
and College Art Association (CAA) meeting. Together they provided 
the genesis for a number of wide-ranging and ideologically diverse 
journal articles.1 These texts, which carry strikingly divergent 
opinions, were the first major attempt to bring critical focus to 
computer art. Subsequently, these articles reframed the reception 
and understanding of the computer and its future role in the 
arts. The conference proceeding and the articles which followed 
responded to the crisis of confidence surfacing within the entire 
computer art project.
This final chapter charts the new analytical temper that entered 
computer art in the mid-1980s and the gradual intensification of 
rhetoric as criticality impacted computer art discourse. At the close 
of the decade, commentators and critics began a comprehensive 
evaluation of computer art in the face of what appeared to be 
computer art’s abject failure. Antagonism and frustration surfaced 
among artists and theorists as the modernist ethos of conservatism 
and technological utopianism that was such a dominant part of 
computer art discourse came under attack.
The diverse ideologies encountered at the close of the decade 
were the result of the changing critical environment within 
visual art, especially given the dominant position of postmodern 
philosophies. Postmodernism and a number of other strategies were 
called on to validate computer art, even when the new paradigm 
was largely ill-suited. Although postmodernism was unable to CHAPTER FIVE
Critical impact
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 202
penetrate the hegemonic technoscience paradigm of computer 
art, the postmodernist discourse does affect the widespread 
understanding of technology in the arts. The computer, as it became 
increasingly accepted in its new pluralistic form, proved a valuable 
postmodern art tool. This had profound effects for the 1990s, 
especially in discourse surrounding new media art. As computer 
art became increasingly contested, the term effectively became 
nebulous, prompting artists and critics to invent more descriptive 
terms. This fragmentation meant that computer art never again 
held the exclusive position it once enjoyed. The discourse lost much 
of its historical importance to the new paradigms, such as digital 
art, which co-opted computer art’s history for its own genealogy.
This chapter focuses on the impact of postmodernism and how 
its critique of modernism fractures the genre of computer art. The 
most obvious outcome for computer art was the collapse of the 
term, as it was unable to accommodate conflicting interpretations. 
Divergent understandings of the ever-evolving computer remained 
the central problem in the schism. The abstract-generative paradigm 
of the artist-programmers, with its media specificity, fostered a 
modernist understanding of the art form. As the decade progressed, 
the technology shifted toward the new screen-based, multi-modal, 
pluralistic approach, which allowed the influential postmodern 
paradigm to become more dominant.
The critical situation that emerged at the close of the 1980s 
centered on, as Mark Resch pointed out, the “relationship between 
computer art and the mainstream art world.”2 Continually 
disenfranchised by the wider artistic community, computer 
artists felt frustrated that acceptance and legitimacy had not yet 
eventuated. Even by the close of the 1980s, computer art discourse 
remained haunted by illegitimacy. In the mid-1980s, according 
to Donald Michie and Rory Johnston, the general consensus was 
that the computer had not met original expectations, acquiring 
on the whole a “bad reputation.”3 The authors saw no “serious 
contribution by computers to the arts” and speculated that if any 
significant addition were to be made, it would be in the distant 
future.4 Roger Malina believed that in the “larger context of the 
history of art, computer art of significance is imminent.”5 Once 
again the continual deferment of success is apparent in the narrative 
of computer art. Ken Knowlton in a 1986 SIGGRAPH art show 
paper asked “Why It Isn’t Art Yet?”6 The frustration of not having 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 203
curators and directors who took technological art seriously even 
produced angry responses in publications such as Leonardo . In 
1986, there was a series of exchanges in the journal over the lack 
of acceptance for this type of art form in the mainstream.7 By 1989 
the editor of Leonardo  David Carrier announced in a somber tone: 
“it is genuinely unclear to me whether any art using computers is 
truly significant.”8 Many artists and theorists such as Nadin were 
expressing a similar disappointment in the computer–art alliance.9 
Nadin felt that it was time to examine “what we address as 
computer art and to try to understand why, despite expectations 
(some very high) and tedious work, despite major investment 
(easily approaching the billion dollar mark and exceeding any other 
investment made in art) and despite enthusiasm, the result has been 
rather minor.”10
From its inception, computer art had been burdened with a 
significant weight of expectation that saw exponents continually 
anticipate a period of maturity in the near future. In effect, the 
artists were still waiting, as Malina described, for “computer art 
to be collected by museums and galleries.”11 In 1989, art critic for 
the Los Angeles Times , Cathy Curtis, believed that while computer 
art had overcome the reputation of the “the nerd at a party,” 
characterized as “too doggedly earnest, too klutzy, too frankly 
unartistic,” there still remained the “‘garbage in, garbage out’ 
truism” that had become the maxim of many critics.12 If it was to 
find success, Curtis believed it needed to conform to what she saw 
as the critical framework and sophisticated evaluative systems that 
defined the mainstream art world.
In an attempt to explore the issue at the core of the artists’ 
discontent, a panel session was organized for the 1989 SIGGRAPH 
conference. It was fittingly entitled “Computer Art—An Oxymoron?” 
with the subtitle “Views from the Mainstream.” International 
museum representatives and mainstream critics were invited to 
“discuss the status of computer art.”13 The speakers came from the 
Institute of Contemporary Art, the National Museum of American 
Art, and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, among others. 
At the heart of the debate was the mainstream art world’s reluctance 
to acknowledge computer art. Dorothy Spencer, the session’s chair, 
asked if computer art would, like photography, “take three-quarters 
of a century” to be accepted by the mainstream.14 Some, such as 
Henry Rand of the National Museum of America, believed that the 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 204
computer, like any other technology in the history of art, would 
take some time to be integrated into fine art. Computer art also 
required, as he saw it, an artist who was a “towering figure”—a 
“Beethoven of the computer” who could “move the spirit of the 
audience.”15 Apart from the empty calls for a computer art genius, 
the session was plagued by confusion, hyperbole, and superficial 
prophecy. Consequently, there was no formal consensus, and the 
participants left frustrated and dissatisfied.16 As Delle Maxwell 
recalled, the mainstream critics did not provide encouragement for 
the computer art project, nor did they invite artists to exhibit in 
their museums or galleries. According to Paul Brown, the critics 
and gallery curators “still felt confident to reiterate their belief that 
computer art” was “cold, intimidating, and heartless.”17 The artists 
felt that their questions were “left unaddressed and that they were 
being written off as insignificant.”18 For Maxwell, the two factions 
“seemed to exist in parallel worlds, unable to pass through an 
invisible though palpable barrier.”19
This animated panel session was one of many critical responses 
to the perceived crisis. The articles that resulted from this exchange 
demonstrate the tendency there was to engage new critical discourses 
as a strategy for giving substance to the computer art project. These 
influential writings appeared in two periodicals. The first, not 
surprisingly, was the journal Leonardo , the bastion of science and 
art knowledge and the most prominent supporter of computer art. 
For the first time, a series of articles, entitled “Computer Art in 
Context,” attempted to bring critical perspective to the field and 
cement computer art’s current position. The most discernible factor 
in the series of articles was the multitude of ideological perspectives, 
which ranged from diatribes attacking the apolitical nature of 
computer art to manifestos calling for the return to modernist 
purity. The authors contributing to the second periodical, Art 
Journal , shared similar intentions; however, they represented a 
more unified critical approach. The series titled “Computer and 
Art: Issues of Content” brought together numerous ideological 
positions that revolved around current trends in postmodern critical 
discourse. The title of each series revealed the subtle difference 
between the contemporary art journal and the specialized science 
and technology–themed journal. The addition of the “and” between 
computer and art—although subtle—signaled the changing 
attitude toward the computer. The distinction between “Content” 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 205
and “Context” also supported this changing trend: the Leonardo  
series sought to establish computer art’s position within the wider 
contemporary art world, while Art Journal  attempted to ground 
computer-based art in social reality. The most significant difference, 
however, was the appearance of computer art, previously a fringe 
topic, in a contemporary art journal. Rarely had a mainstream 
contemporary art journal widened its scope to encompass computer 
art. Because the number of computer artists increased dramatically 
in the 1980s, and digital forms were proliferating at great speed, 
the journals of the mainstream and avant-garde felt they needed to 
respond.
What the specialist and contemporary art journals illustrated 
was evidence of a new mode of criticism previously unseen in 
the computer art movement. The two publications confirmed the 
appearance of critical discourses within computer art and the 
expanded field of electronic art. While the 1989 appearance of 
critical discourse on computer art seemed sudden, there were 
already a number of trends in contemporary art that affected in 
minor ways the contextual formation of computer art. The most 
distinctive indicator of these growing trends was a study conducted 
by Richard Lucas in 1986.20 Importantly, this empirical study 
confirmed a distinctive shift toward contemporary art and its 
dominant critical discourse.
The study attempted to identify and establish an aesthetic 
criterion for computer-generated art. The catalyst, as in previous 
investigations, was the unresolved matter of computer art’s aesthetic 
foundation. Lucas felt that the changes produced by the computer 
forced “critical analysis beyond ‘normal’ limits.”21 This in turn 
resulted in the need for new criteria that incorporated unfamiliar 
concepts. For Lucas, the “inherent properties of computer art” 
required at least “some change in our approach to evaluating its 
aesthetic worth.”22 In establishing or recognizing new aesthetic 
criteria, Lucas employed a formal study, called the Delphi Procedure, 
which sought to arrive at a consensus of thought among experts. 
The international figures—representing a good combination of 
artists, theorists, and commentators—included Charles Csuri, 
Frank Dietrich, Hiroshi Kawano, Monique Nahas, Mihai Nadin, 
Frieder Nake, Lillian Schwartz, and Gene Youngblood.
Since the 1970s, there was a strong impulse to formulate a basis 
from which computer art could be defined, evaluated, categorized, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 206
and judged. In part, this was a response to the continual criticism 
computer art received. Computer art was viewed as fragmented; 
consequently, almost all writings on computer art began with a call 
for formal criteria in the hope that this would have a homogenizing 
effect. Although the computer art project consisted of divergent 
opinions and competing ideologies, there had been no systematic 
attempt to locate overarching commonalities. The study’s primary 
question, central to the ongoing debate, was: “Should computer 
art be considered a new art form which requires new criteria for 
assessing its aesthetic?”23 The consensus up to the mid-1980s was 
that computer art did require a unique criterion. However, the 
results from the Lucas study differed substantially from previous 
positions. Overall, participants responded in the negative. The 
participants were reluctant to recognize the appearance of, or 
even a need for, a new aesthetic standard. Surprisingly, there was 
also a considerable concurrence of opinion endorsing traditional 
criteria. Reaffirming these traditional aesthetic values—described 
in the report as the visual basics of harmony, symmetry, and 
balance—meant that the respondents were confirming the merit of 
formalist values. Nadin felt that far from overturning traditional 
modernist aesthetics, computer art mostly “reemphasised” them.24 
The participants, with varying rationales, reaffirmed traditional 
aesthetics because no “new aesthetic ideologies” had emerged that 
would give reason for a “departure from traditional aesthetics.”25 
Regardless of whether innovative properties emerged, traditional 
aesthetics, Nadin suggested, would not be rendered obsolete. For 
Nadin, traditional criteria would remain an integral part of the 
aesthetic evaluation of computer art. The majority of participants 
clearly stated that further technological developments would be 
of little consequence toward the rejection of traditional criteria. 
Furthermore, they agreed that computer art should be viewed as a 
pedigree of fine art and should be firmly embedded in its heritage.
While modernist aesthetics was reaffirmed as the only valid 
and workable criteria among the majority, there was nonetheless 
a “dissenting faction within the group” who believed “criteria 
in general are transitory and often short-sighted,” therefore of 
“dubious distinction to a lasting evaluation of any form of art.”26 
The idea of aesthetics, like greatness in the canon, had become 
contested since the 1970s. These artists were responding to the 
widespread postmodernist questioning of value judgment inherent 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 207
in modernist orthodoxy. Following current radicalism, the artists 
claimed that there was no basis for value judgments and aesthetic 
criteria.
In addition, among these dissenters there was a call for 
computer artists to engage in the social realities of the day. 
Historically, computer art, through its emphasis on abstraction and 
instrumentality, had been isolated and disengaged from social and 
political spheres. The progressive respondents, led by Youngblood 
and Schwartz, believed that art should be evaluated “regardless 
of the medium” and that other factors should come into play, 
such as how the work “contributes to contemporary society” and 
how it reflects and challenges “human needs and desires.”27 These 
commentators sought to define computer art as a historical mode 
of praxis, socially constituted and in a constant state of flux, in 
contrast with the impersonal temper and detached abstraction of 
previous computer art.
Apart from the shift to social contextualization, the study 
highlights the trend toward the subjugation of the technical 
dimension of the computer. While there was a willingness among 
respondents to acknowledge the existence of unique properties 
within the computer, they found those factors did not justify 
“new aesthetic criteria” or the title of “innovative art.”28 This is 
a substantial shift from those previous beliefs that supported the 
formation of a new criterion based on unique functional attributes. 
This Greenbergian model looked to differentiate computer art—
to claim autonomy from other art forms by defining its central 
characteristics. Other participants, contradicting previous thinking, 
sought to separate the production from the product. Youngblood 
cautioned against confusing a technique with the art form: 
“The properties of a medium, the techniques that define it, do 
not constitute the exploration which they may facilitate.”29 The 
uneasiness over the conflation of process and art was constantly 
evident in the disdain for the term “computer art,” which failed 
to make that distinction. For example, Nake felt that the term 
suggested that the “computer adds aesthetic reality to a given 
piece”—for him this was a “horrible suggestion.”30 For many, the 
term “computer art” burdened the work with functionalist ideals 
and the need for esoteric technical understanding.
The anxiety over computer art’s accent on production was 
paralleled by the general concern that technology had often 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 208
subordinated creativity. For Nadin, the computer was still 
“controlling the artist.”31 Similarly, for Nake, the medium was 
“surpassing the message almost totally.”32 Csuri also warned 
against the overt celebration of “interactivity,” because the “novelty 
of such technology” may “overshadow the aesthetic function of 
that object.”33 Many of the study’s respondents reiterated the point 
that traditional art also had highly diverse interactive modes. Csuri 
warned against inflating the potential of artificial intelligence, which 
had not reached the initial expectations forecast by its proponents 
and advocates. This skeptical response, widely shared within the 
study, shows that the attitudes of technoscience and modernist 
paradigms were beginning to wane. Equally, there developed an 
increasingly sober view of the endemic futurology that had been 
such a dominant feature of computer art discourse.
While the study’s objective was to provide a consensus, the report 
reached no firm conclusions. If anything, it restated modernist 
aesthetic criteria. The study highlighted the many contradictions, 
paradoxes, ambivalences, and diverse ideologies inherent in 
the computer art movement. The study seemed to suggest that 
the former hopes of engendering a new art form with its own 
criteria (as photography and later video achieved) would never 
materialize. As the ever-pragmatic Csuri suggested, no “new reality 
or point of view” or anything that resembled an art “movement” 
had appeared.34 In 1989, these views and attitudes surfaced with 
such intensity that computer art became thoroughly destabilized. 
Nevertheless, by the time of the conferences and articles of 1989, 
there was a new attempt at a consensus of opinion. However, this 
time the new critical discourse, which had reshaped much art theory 
and history, would have a greater role in redefining art made with 
advanced technology.
The trend toward criticality, which had been evolving slowly 
since the mid-1980s, climaxed at the close of the decade. For the 
first time, writing on computer art contained references to critical 
and postmodern philosophers. In 1989 Timothy Binkley wrote that 
the computer was rising from the “sea of Postmodern culture not 
as a new Venus promising more beautiful art, but as a wily sorcerer 
taunting us with its cleverness.”35 Suddenly computer art was 
being theorized through thinkers such as Walter Benjamin, Michel 
Foucault, Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, Jean Baudrillard, and 
Jean-François Lyotard.
CRITICAL  IMPACT 209
The appearance of critical discourse in the computer art field was 
part of a larger trend in visual art discourse. During the 1970s, the 
discipline of art history underwent significant reorientation toward 
the social-critical. The culmination of this trend in art-historical 
practice was called by some the “new art history.” Like the broad 
intellectual movement of postmodernism, the new art history had 
its roots in the political and ideological activism of the late 1960s. 
During and after this period, class, gender politics, and the nature of 
capitalism and imperialist nation-states came under intense critical 
investigation. Art history also came under the influence of these 
more radical trends. Influenced by the social histories of art written 
by T. J. Clark and others in the 1970s, historians and critics alike 
became increasingly interested in the political and social critique of 
art, art criticism, and art history. Modern art and its histories came 
under intense evaluation. Traditional aesthetics, connoisseurship, 
antiquarianism, historical narratives, and the representation of 
ethnic and sexual identity became the subject of criticism. As the 
paradigm of social criticism developed, organizational categories 
and concepts began to surface. A raft of critics and theorists, such 
as Rosalind Krauss, Douglas Crimp, Craig Owens, Victor Burgin, 
Hal Foster, and many more, employed a variety of these critical 
methods. They developed in the 1980s a broad critical art history 
under the standard of postmodernism. In the late 1980s, these 
contemporary art theorists were increasingly engaged by computer 
art commentators in the theorization of art and technology.
In the 1980s, postmodernism in its varied forms had a powerful 
effect on the contemporary imagination. By the late 1980s, it was 
the dominant cultural paradigm for a wide variety of cultural 
practices and theoretical positions. Its critical and descriptive range 
extended across various disciplinary and discursive boundaries. 
Once its eclectic, adaptable, and transformative character emerged, 
postmodernism became, as Stuart Sims described, a veritable 
machine for producing discourse.36 It was only a matter of time 
before postmodernism made a similar incursion into the remote 
and marginalized field of computer art.
Postmodernism entered computer art discourse relatively late 
compared with its arrival among other art forms. In the late 1980s, 
critics began considering the political potential of mass culture 
through its different technological modes. Beyond postmodernism’s 
new relationship with technology, the driving concept of 1980s 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 210
cultural politics was the deconstruction of modernism. The critique 
of modernism and its institutions was the primary critical strategy 
that postmodernist commentators used in deconstructing computer 
art and its discourse. Importantly for this new breed of commentators 
and artists, postmodernism refined, as Lyotard suggested in his 
seminal text, “our sensitivity to differences” and increased “our 
tolerance of incommensurability.”37 Computer art had always 
remained incommensurable. Now finally there was a discourse that 
recognized, and was receptive to, the marginalized and incongruous. 
For the new computer artists and theorists, postmodern discourse 
seemed to possess the means to create a sustainable and firm 
foundation for the further conceptualization of computer art. Here, 
also, was the chance to enter the mainstream contemporary art 
debate by embracing the dominant critical paradigm. Paradoxically, 
by eschewing the prior dominant paradigm of modernism to which 
it had been so attached and by joining forces with a new dominant 
paradigm that advocated listening to the marginalized, computer 
art could finally function in the expanded field of contemporary art.
The intention of the new postmodernist commentators was to 
fill the critical and theoretical void that had plagued computer art 
since its inception. Both the science-orientated and mainstream art 
commentators had acknowledged the hitherto lack of critical rigor. 
According to Robert E. Mueller, those who had theorized computer 
art prior to the 1980s had been mostly “upbeat and reassuring.”38 
In the early 1980s, Mueller recognized that commentators were 
being seduced by the “dazzling new scientific techniques” inherent 
in computer art production and advocated that those interested in 
computer art should study art and its histories.39 Likewise, Harold 
Cohen felt there was an absence of critical engagement:
That computer art has lacked criticism almost completely is 
perhaps the most important reason why I don’t want anything 
to do with it. Computer art exhibitions are like mail-order 
catalogs: everything marvelous, everything up-to-the-minute or 
just dressed up, and nothing ever presented or discussed, under 
any circumstance, in terms of its significance.40
Many believed that computer art needed a historical tradition 
or critical context in which to assess the artwork. For Roger 
Malina, the shortfall of “adequate theoretical, historical, and 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 211
critical framework” was the largest “impediment [to] assessing the 
significance of computer art.”41 As artist and critic Terry Gips noted 
in 1990, it was “nearly impossible to find informed and thoughtful 
critical writing about art made with the computer.”42 From the 
beginning, computer art had a reputation for being uncritical. 
Indeed, the Computer Art Society, established in London in the late 
1960s, had decided against applying “heavy criticism because this 
would discourage potential artists.”43 One of the main objectives of 
the new postmodernists was to break the existing stalemate over 
computer art’s position within art. Writing in the 1990 Art Journal  
issue “Computer and Art: Issues of Content,” Terry Gips asserted:
While conferences and journals have over the years provided 
forums for the fruitful exchange of technical  concepts, many 
artists, curators, and critics have bemoaned the lack of a critical  
dialogue … In practical terms then, this issue is an attempt to 
mitigate the existing condition and, through texts and images, 
establish a more solid theoretical ground for producing and 
understanding digital art.44
There was a need, said Gips, to “push beyond description” and 
“grapple with the much more demanding issues of content.”45 
Significantly, these quotations, beyond indicating the move toward 
a perceived need for criticality, reveal the shift toward the use of 
the term “digital art” instead of “computer art.” Gips recognized 
the different and often superfluous connotations of the numerous 
terms available. Like many of her contemporaries, she used the 
terms “digital art” and “computer art” interchangeably, thus 
forestalling precision and lucidity. Nevertheless, the term“computer 
art” had a fundamental problem which arose when there was a 
complex intertwining of traditional analog, electronic, and digital 
technologies, and when the artist had no desire to proclaim the 
medium as central to the work. In fact, artist Judson Rosebush 
proclaimed in 1989 that “computer art has become a meaningless 
term.”46 That same year, Brian Reffin Smith proclaimed this to his 
readers: “Let us make an art that does not need the computer to 
justify it.”47 Positively, for the postmodernist, the term “digital art” 
suggested a comprehensive process without linking the computer—
the hardware itself—directly to the art. The terms “electronic 
art” and “new media art” also broadened the definition and 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 212
placed emphasis on an overall technological process rather than a 
particular medium or machine.
The objective of the new critical stance, besides providing an 
alternative to the term “computer art,” was to identify and if 
necessary recast the history of computer art. Gips reminded the 
reader that in the current climate, where artists had a newfound 
attraction to computers, it was “easy to forget” that the computer 
had a history in the arts.48 She pointed out that pioneering artists 
since the 1960s had “investigated technically, aesthetically, and 
philosophically” those issues that seemed so “freshly urgent.”49 For 
Gips, those pioneers, while making a history, have “worked without 
the benefit of having  a history of computer art.”50 The computer 
artists, Gips suggested, “lacked a critical mass with regard to 
production, audience response, and constructive discourse.”51 She 
explained:
As a result, the issues of computer art remained less than fully 
formed, and the art itself, struggling in an infertile environment, 
failed to ripen. Through those years, work produced was 
occasionally a portentous venture into new territory, sometimes 
an interesting recasting of a former work but too often an empty 
outburst of technical bravura.52
Like Lucas’ findings, the previous emphasis on production over 
content was increasingly disparaged. The technical development 
of the medium, a product of its close allegiance with the scientific 
world, had for Gips produced only trivial objects. The “old” 
computer art, while having a strong technical history, had no art 
theoretical basis and hence lacked the language and the critical 
tools that were fundamental to the maturity of an art form. Only 
now, Gips argued in 1990, wrestled away from the superficial 
world of functional expedience, could the real history of art and 
technology be told. Gips and others appeared to be unaware of the 
experimental aesthetic, along with other technoscience discourses, 
that had underpinned computer art for more than a decade. 
Computer art had a theoretical basis, to be sure, just not one that 
emanated from the arts.
For Gips, the function of the new critical discourse was to address 
the process of “incorporating electronic technologies into the art-
making process,” and to prompt a “rethink” of the “definitions 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 213
of technology and its relation to art throughout history.”53 It was 
no longer a matter of merely humanizing technology—the highly 
suspect modernist approach—but of redefining technology in terms 
of its holistic and disruptive forces. Increasingly, under the banner 
of postmodernism, technology was politicized.
The important factor for Gips and other postmodernists was 
that computers “disrupted the agenda of modernism.”54 For Gips, 
“digital technologies have served as a garish yellow highlighting 
pen, causing many of the old modernist dilemmas to jump off 
the page.”55 Following Lyotard in particular, new computer art 
commentators called for the deconstruction of the meta-narratives 
of modernity. This method criticized modernist value systems and 
their claim to authority in the field of artistic activity and theory. 
Rejecting the pretension of totalizing theories and modernism’s 
perceived authority, the postmodernists became defenders of 
difference. Postmodernism finally offered a critical mode that 
overcame the tyranny of modernism. For computer art, modernism 
had remained an elusive paradigm and it was unable to fully 
conform to modernism’s major tenets.
One common approach taken by the postmodernists was 
to align computer technology with the history of photographic 
technology. Photography’s history in the arts and its potential as a 
disruptor or subverter of modernist values became a key trope in 
the postmodernist position and so proved a useful basis on which to 
cement computer art’s claim as a postmodern practice.
Margot Lovejoy was one of the most significant figures in applying 
postmodern theory to art and technology discourse. In 1989, as an 
artist and critic, she published the influential Postmodern Currents: 
Art and Artists in the Age of Electronic Media , which positioned 
art and technology as part of the larger cultural postmodernist 
trend.56 For Lovejoy, electronic technologies were emblematic 
of the postmodern era. She believed that technological change 
transformed consciousness, disrupted modernist conventions, and 
forced a redefinition of representation and its evaluative criteria. 
She viewed current cultural trends through older technologies and 
their histories. In her Art Journal  article, Lovejoy highlighted the 
“parallel relationship” between photography and electronic media 
in heralding a new age.57
Like photography’s influence on the dynamism of modernism, 
the postmodern shift, for Lovejoy, was being driven by electronic 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 214
media. She also voiced a common belief that 1980s visual culture 
was a parallel moment to the “one that arose when photographic 
technologies posed a threat to the art institutions of the nineteenth 
century.”58 Following the lead of other postmodern art theorists, 
she situated Walter Benjamin as the pivotal figure and advocate 
of new reproductive technologies. He provided a “framework 
for understanding the forceful impact of technological media on 
society” as well as “its disruption of the fine arts.”59 Benjamin 
believed that improvements in the technology of mechanical 
reproduction would lead to a reduction in the criterion for 
authenticity, to a deteriorating of the aura of originality, and to a 
crucial revaluation of technical categories.60 The postmodernists 
were not the first to make a connection between computer art 
and Benjamin’s theories. Marc Adrian, in the 1969 catalog 
Kunst und Computer , believed that the practice of computer 
art would inevitably lead to the “destruction of the prestigious 
‘aura of the work of art.’”61 Lovejoy, like other postmodernists, 
felt that photography had become a primary instrument in the 
deconstruction of modernist conventions. It had become the “chief 
catalyst in rendering out-of-date many mythical and mystical 
notions about art.”62 Following in the footsteps of photography, 
computer art, with its reproductive capabilities, had partially 
collapsed the boundaries between high and low art and questioned 
the aura and the ritualization of the art object. Post-industrial 
technology, instead of being linked to the Enlightenment idea of 
progress that characterized early discussions on computer art, was 
now envisaged as a disrupter of traditional orders.
Since Douglas Crimp’s 1977 exhibition Pictures , photography 
had been increasingly identified with the assault on modernist 
representation and its claims of originality. And by the mid-
1980s, postmodernism became the orthodox position for those 
engaged in writing about photography. Importantly, some critics 
and art theorists had accorded the status of avant-garde to many 
photographers. Following a long period of marginalization, 
photography was considered central to the postmodern shift and, 
importantly for Lovejoy, it was given a key position in the modalities 
of contemporary art. Lovejoy also believed that photography had 
originally been dismissed as an art form for many of the same 
reasons as other technologically based arts, including computer art. 
Employing the same critical modes in which photography gained 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 215
primacy in the mainstream, Lovejoy argued that computer-based 
arts could also acquire a significant position at the forefront of 
contemporary art. By discussing the avant-gardist photographers 
Barbara Kruger, Cindy Sherman, and Robert Mapplethorpe in 
relation to computer and electronic art, Lovejoy posited electronic 
art as part of the larger mode of reproductive technologies that had 
recently been employed to emphasize the pluralistic polemics and 
cultural imperatives of postmodernism.
The theorist and computer artist Donna Cox, writing in the 
1989 Leonardo  issue, also used photography as a comparative 
measure and template for the discussion of computer-based art. 
For Cox, photography had emulated painting until it found its 
own purity. This corresponds to the history of computer art 
which, after copying older styles, asserted its essential character 
through algorithmic and interactive modes. Cox’s analysis relied 
extensively on a quintessential postmodern art text, Brian Wallis’ 
Art After Modernism  (1984).63 She somewhat crudely framed 
computer art within the history and contemporary strategies of 
photography by merely inserting “computer art” into a quote from 
the original text:
Virtually every critical and theoretical issue which postmodernist 
art may be said to engage in in one sense or another can be 
located with photography [and computer art]. Issues having to 
do with authorship, subjectivity, and uniqueness are built into the 
very nature of the photographic [and computer] process itself.64
Postmodernism, for Cox, was the “new systemic cultural norm,” 
and through its success in a wide range of philosophical and 
social discourses it could become an important instrument in the 
theorization of computer art.65 However, for Cox, a shift needed to 
occur in postmodernism in order to “assimilate such alien aesthetic 
activities” as scientific visualization and computer art.66
Timothy Binkley, like Lovejoy, also applied postmodernist theory 
to the art and technology field.67 Writing in the 1989 issues of both 
Leonardo  and Art Journal , Binkley believed that the computer 
should not be placed in the modernist context; rather, because 
of its conceptual orientation, computer art was postmodernist in 
character. He formulated the influential theory that designated 
the computer not as a new medium, but as a “metamedium.”68 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 216
To describe it as a new medium is for Binkley retrograde, since its 
conceptual and simulating properties (correlated to contemporary 
postmodern strategies) overcame the delimiting tendencies of 
modernism.69
Binkley’s Art Journal  article stressed computer art’s theoretical 
alignment with postmodern discourse by confirming the existence 
of four common themes or attributes: conceptualism, pluralism, 
simulation, and metadiscourse. Binkley saw computer art as part 
of the trend toward the dematerialization of the art object. The 
inherent abstraction and symbolic mode of computing meant that 
the art sat easily in the sphere of conceptualism. Like the previous 
postmodernists, Binkley believed the computer to be radically 
pluralistic. The digital interactive interface format, its speed and 
memory, its potentiality, and its interconnectivity meant that there 
were new modes of experiencing cultural information across diverse 
fields. Binkley also found that computers fostered a method that 
was opposed to metanarratives.
While most critics celebrated the postmodern era and posited 
technological change as emblematic of postmodernity, Beverly 
Jones, writing in Leonardo , chose not to use the term. Nevertheless, 
like all of the commentators and theorists, she built on the 
decentering strategies practiced by the postmodernists. She used 
deconstructionist theory to excavate the ideologies of computer-
generated imagery, and believed it was in accord with the broader 
post-structuralist project.70 She also felt that post-structuralist 
strategies would bring a degree of theoretical rigor and historically 
specific analysis to computer art forms. Like the previous 
commentators, Jones initially viewed computer art in relation to the 
“controversies and dilemmas” of photography’s history and took a 
“holistic” view that refused to attach objects to their “disciplinary 
divisions,” which she believed was “arbitrary, valueless, falsifying 
and obscuring.”71
The postmodern practice of refusing to categorize was adopted 
at the 1985 Paris art and technology exhibition Les Immatériaux , 
which made no distinctions between artists’ and scientific images.72 
Curated by the postmodernist philosopher Jean-Françios Lyotard, 
the exhibition “sought to chart the new order of our postmodern 
condition.”73 Following Lyotard’s lead, Jones felt that modernist art 
focused on categories and boundaries and thus missed the “larger 
cultural context” of art’s praxis, reception, and cultural meaning. 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 217
By focusing on formal characteristics and definitions, the analysis 
failed to reflect the “larger models of cultural reality.”74
Most importantly perhaps, postmodern critical theory provided 
a platform to attack computer art for its inherent conservatism. 
Throughout the climate of political radicalism that characterized 
the 1970s, computer art remained ostensibly apolitical. Not until the 
mid-1980s did any computer artist, such as Copper Giloth, reflect 
the broader changes in contemporary art by making a substantial 
polemical statement. Even when Giloth in the 1980s approached 
the controversial topic of abortion in her installation Clothes 
Hangers , she found her peers in the computer art movement to 
be “uncomfortable,” preferring instead to avoid highly politicized 
topics.75
The most forceful written polemic was given by Brian Reffin 
Smith in the 1989 Leonardo  issue “Computer Art in Context.” A 
regular iconoclast of computer art and its conservative tradition, 
Smith wrote what was perhaps the most radical critique attempted 
to date. The article entitled “Beyond Computer Art” began:
Let us first agree that most “computer art” is old-fashioned, 
boring, meretricious nonsense; and then that most of it is done by 
people whose knowledge of contemporary art and its problems 
is more or less zero; and then that most of this “art” is actually a 
demonstration of the power of a few companies’ graphic systems; 
then that most of the “art” is really graphic design, produced for 
graphic design-like (and thus not art-like) reasons; and finally 
that there is a sort of “mafia” of people who produce, teach, and 
write about, judge at competitions and generally celebrate and 
curate this “art.”76
With an irreverent tone, Smith told his readers that they should not 
be surprised that “proper” art galleries critically ignore computer 
art.77 Nor should one be surprised that computer art, although 
having been “around for 38 years,” had “virtually no place in the 
archives of contemporary art, not even in the interstices reserved 
for phenomena such as video or ‘technological’ art.”78 With biting 
satire and parody, Smith derided the amateurism of technologists 
and scientists who produced “symmetrical whirls and spirals as if 
from a supermarket drawing toy.”79 Mocking the work as trivial, 
Smith described pioneering computer art as the stuff their “mothers 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 218
used to make by banging nails into a piece of wood and stretching 
thread in between to make patterns.”80
The problem for Smith was that computer artists were too 
closely allied to the economy of computer companies, which meant 
that they were far removed from contemporary art concerns and 
debates. Computer art was, for this iconoclast, inherently associated 
with the rhetoric and ideals of technology. For Smith, computer 
artists—really technologists in disguise—were Robinson Crusoe 
figures, inhabiting a “kind of conceptual desert island” in which 
they trudge aimlessly around its fractal perimeter, desperately 
seeking SIGGRAPH, and far from the concerns and purview of 
contemporary art.81
Smith went on to further criticize the conferences that provided 
support for computer art by stipulating that if “film is the truth 
24 times a second … computer art shows and conferences tend 
to be lies and humiliation once a year.”82 Lamenting the fact 
that computer art could have been the “most revolutionary art 
form ever,” Smith blamed those self-deluded opportunists who 
“hijacked” and transformed “banal nonsense into value-added 
insults to the intelligence.”83 He added that computer art, in the 
hands of technologists and their domineering high-tech companies, 
had become banal and conformist.
Smith believed that there was a need to move beyond computer 
art so that it could be employed to tackle the important sociopolitical 
debates of the day. Smith’s own politicized work, which attempted 
to demystify and undermine conservative traditions—the pervasive 
Thatcherism he saw—in politics and art, functioned in the public 
domain (Figure 5.1). He believed that computer art should provoke, 
question, and challenge the body politic and that this should happen 
to the point where computer companies, which normally collect 
computer art, would reject it. This could only be accomplished, 
according to Smith, by not confusing graphic design with art, which 
had its own critical agenda. In addition, ideas should be taught 
along with the technical aspect of computers, so technology is 
demystified rather than deified. At the time, Smith felt that there was 
too much of an emphasis on the latest computer technology, which 
blinded the artist to the potential of older technologies and created 
a situation in which the artist would forever be shackled to those 
ideologies of technology that supported capitalistic economies. To 
prevent this, there needed to be a shift in pedagogic strategies—a 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 219
move away from expert technician toward ideas-based tutors. This 
would precipitate, as Smith suggested, the inclusion of “critical 
discourse and contextual and productive references in the artwork 
itself.”84
Smith’s call for a critical dialogue contrasted dramatically with 
the positions occupied by contributors to the 1989 Leonardo  issue. 
The Leonardo  issue revealed a spectrum of ideologies and attitudes, 
whereas the Art Journal  series put forward a more homogenous and 
unified critical position. While the postmodernists in Art Journal  
were devaluing the mainstays of modernism, such as ideals of 
uniqueness, authorial genius, and formal purity, many computer 
artists from Leonardo  were advocating a return to modernist 
principles. Tom DeWitt, a computer artist, proposed that the term 
“computer art” should be replaced with “dataism.” His manifesto 
(again a written declaration that was modernist in tradition) called 
on the computer artists, whom he called dataists, to embrace the 
“innate formalism” within the programmed procedures of the 
machine.85 The aim was to build on the remnants of modernism in 
order to reverse the iconoclasm of anti-art movements such as Dada 
and to restate “traditional aesthetics through formal practices.”86 FIGURE 5.1  Brian Reffin Smith, That Cher Evil,  1988. Photographic 
reproduction of plotter drawing on billboard, Hamburg, Germany. © Brian 
Reffin Smith.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 220
The dataists were to go forth and “build a foundation for aesthetic 
structures,” to “enjoy an integrity that is possible only when a 
common language is used to communicate the processes of creation 
from generation to generation.”87
Apart from the distinctly modernist rhetoric, other commentators 
in the Leonardo  issue reinforced the close allegiance of computer 
art to technoscience discourses. They stressed the importance of 
existing scientific paradigms and methodologies. Cox advocated the 
understanding of postmodernism through the cybernetic paradigm, 
as it provided a model for complex dynamic systems in which “new 
levels of organization and creativity emerge.”88 She also posited a 
“cybernetic approach to art criticism,” which would provide a more 
holistic view than the one put forward by modernism and more 
recently by postmodernism.89 In fact, Cox lambasted postmodern 
critics for their “languid historicism” and their failure to “recognize 
the real ‘new,’” which she saw as the new mode of scientific aesthetics 
and visualization emerging from the interdisciplinary fields of 
science and technology.90 Cox believed the artist’s expertise should 
be put into the service of science.91 Working at the National Center 
for Supercomputing and Applications, Cox accomplished important 
work in the field of scientific visualization. Her participation 
enriched the process of scientific discovery and revolutionized the 
way scientists employed simulations. In the late 1980s, scientific 
visualization was, according to Margaret Neal, in a “hot phase” 
because it ignited within the scientists and mathematicians “new 
insights, new directions for research, [and] new knowledge of the 
subject.”92 Centered on the potential for new knowledge through 
scientific visualization, a number of artists joined with scientists, 
computer scientists, and engineers in government and privately 
funded institutional research groups, including the celebrated 
Electronic Visualization Lab at the University of Illinois at Chicago. 
Cox felt that the future of art existed in these collaborations, what 
she called “Renaissance teams.”93 The collaborative group (art)n 
founded by artist Ellen Sandor in 1981 at the Illinois Institute of 
Technology became internationally celebrated.
Many computer-based artists were still deeply involved in 
scientific research methodology, particularly through mathematics. 
In the 1989 Leonardo  issue, Roger Malina (now the executive editor 
of the journal) reiterated the importance of computer art to science, 
especially in the popularization of mathematics. Responding to 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 221
David Carrier’s question of whether “any art using computers is 
truly significant,” Malina answered in the affirmative—especially, 
he asserts, when one considers computer art’s role in the promotion 
of the abstract sciences.94 Malina, evoking the writings of Marshall 
McLuhan, believed that “the conscious role of the artist is to 
explore and create awareness of the new environment created by 
new technology.”95 Following his father Frank Malina, who was the 
founding editor of Leonardo , Roger also felt that one of the roles of 
art was to “mellow the applications of science and mathematics.”96
The humanization of the abstract sciences and technology 
had been a continuing preoccupation within the computer art 
project. Frank Malina had believed, as Leonardo ’s editor Pamela 
Grant-Ryan wrote, “artists in particular should be instrumental in 
developing technology towards humane ends.”97 His son felt that 
in the current context, with the artist’s social role as “humaniser, 
commentator and coloniser of technology,” the computer art project 
had indeed become significant.98 He used Cox as an example of a 
colonizing artist who successfully controled “the most advanced 
technological tools.”99 This position located art in the service of 
science and technology, while the opposing postmodern position 
recognized technology in the service of cultural politics.
Like the artist-programmer puritans, Roger Malina advocated 
the primacy of the computer’s essential character as computer art’s 
dynamic force. In direct opposition to some of the postmodern 
commentators, he believed that the more significant computer art 
took advantage of the “unique new capabilities made possible by 
the computer.”100 Making a distinction along technological lines, 
this position encouraged judgment to be made on the art’s unique 
production, rather than on aesthetic grounds. Malina, while noting 
the need for increased contextual and historical understanding, 
encouraged the new generation of theorists and historians to 
“pay particular attention to art that could not have been made 
without  the use of a computer.”101 Significantly for Malina, the 
mode of analysis emerged from the computer’s specificity. Again, 
instrumentality and the mode of production were emphasized over 
content. Placing primacy upon the essential aspects of the medium 
directly contradicted the postmodernist line, which called for the 
inevitable separation of process and product.
The accentuation of process and instrumentation followed a 
trend previously promoted by Frank Popper, who later emerged as 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 222
a major historian and commentator on computer and electronic 
art.102 In 1987, Popper felt it was necessary to adequately define the 
new artistic trends rising from a technologically advance society. He 
believed that in the 1980s the trend in technological art had been 
renewed and strengthened, and it had become increasingly visible. 
It was essential, Popper thought, to devise a strategy that would 
make these new art forms more “perceptible to the public.”103 This 
meant differentiating the new artworks from both their forerunners 
and their fellow artists working within traditional media. For 
Popper, the exhibition Les Immatériaux , with its “postmodernist 
bias,” made no “categorical distinctions” between artistic and 
scientific images, and this, for him, created an uneasy ambiguity.104 
In contrast to the postmodern position, Popper felt that any future 
exhibitions should have its parameters “rigorously defined.”105
Popper said that the artists who had taken part in the myriad of 
exhibitions through the early 1980s fit between two extremes: “those 
who use or pretend to use ‘technoscience’ as a tool only and those 
who wish to show through their works the aesthetic properties of 
scientific or technological phenomena or achievements.”106 Popper 
mistrusted those who employed technology as merely a means to 
an artistic end, with no investment in the wonder of science and 
technology. Likewise, scientists with a pretension for artistry who 
popularized their research with aesthetic decorations were dually 
unwelcome. While the “artistic imagination must dominate over 
scientific inspiration,” the ideal artist for Popper “must have a strong 
interest in up-to-date scientific methods and/or discoveries and their 
technological applications.”107 He conceived of an artistic practice 
that had continual links to scientific and technological knowledge, yet 
had the necessary aesthetic dimension to keep it from pure scientific 
imperatives. Attempting to overcome the “overabundance of often 
arbitrary and absurd appellations” circulating at the time, Popper 
offered the term “technoscience art.”108 As the term suggests, the art 
that Popper was endeavoring to define was intrinsically linked to the 
institutions, parameters, and theories of science and technology.
As demonstrated, computer art and the wider field of electronic 
art had an innate connection to the ideologies of technoscience. 
Prevalent within computer art discourse and inherent in traditional 
technoscience paradigms was an underlying modernist ethos. Deep 
within the computer art consciousness was a desire for uniformity 
and a need to locate the internal logic of the art form. This was 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 223
a part of the larger project of self-discovery and theoretical self-
formation that computer art had embarked upon. Computer 
commentators and artists were continually concerned with notions 
of continuity, tradition, and evolutionary development. Like 
modernist orthodoxy, computer art had striven for a necessary 
self-reflexivity in its exploration into its own essential nature. 
Computer artists wanted, akin to Greenberg, to move toward 
greater autonomy in the definition of art. This usually took the 
form of differentiating the computational medium from others or 
creating a formal systematic criterion for computer art’s evaluation 
and criticism. With a preference for internal properties, intricacies, 
and evaluation criteria, computer art’s approach was essentially 
modernist in design.
Likewise, orthodox computer artists desired to achieve a 
distinctive style within their body of work, which followed the 
modernist imperative to invent personal and private styles.
Proponents of computer art also continually evoked the 
Hegelian modernist metaphor of growth and maturity. As explored 
in the previous chapter, computer art discourse is riddled with 
historical and teleological self-absorption. The computer artists and 
exponents continually looked forward to a new historical epoch, 
a kind of Hegelian imagining, where computer-based art would 
finally mature into an acknowledged and valued art form. Most 
often computer art narratives assumed an unbroken technological 
progress stretching indefinitely into a promising future.
Part of computer art’s utopianism was the positioning of the 
computer artist at the vanguard of advanced technology. Up to 
the late 1980s, computer art never moved far from the concerns of 
modern science and technology and their underlying Enlightenment 
objectives. In many respects, computer art was another attempt to 
fulfill the Enlightenment dream, wrought by Descartes and Leibniz, 
of the mathematization of the world. Abstracting art, a core pursuit 
of the computer artists in the 1960s and 1970s, was applicable to the 
pursuits of the scientific revolution: formulate rules of method that 
aim at “disciplining the production of knowledge by managing or 
eliminating the effects of human passions and interests.”109 Computer 
art owed its heritage to one of the core features of modernity: 
the commitment to the ideals of technological progress—or, as 
Habermas wrote, the “infinite progress of knowledge and … infinite 
advance toward social and moral betterment.”110
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 224
Through the art of programming, computer art had always 
been encumbered with a sober rationalistic mode of consciousness. 
Moreover, the computer as a machine was ultimately linked to 
instrumentalism. The postmodernists had been critical of universal 
pretensions of rationality, one of the most cherished assumptions 
of the orthodox Enlightenment. The overt abstracting and 
reductive process of programming appeared to run against the 
grain of postmodern pluralism. In addition, computer art had been 
throughout its history preoccupied by the ideology of the “new.” 
For the postmodernist, the pursuit of formal or artistic innovation 
for its own sake was judged futile, because it resulted in novelty 
without authentic artistic or creative meaning. Kenneth Knowlton 
believed that computer art was not yet “beyond the gee-whiz state 
of cuteness, of stunts, and of novelty for its own sake.”111 The 
cult of originality, which underpinned the modernist avant-garde, 
was located in computer art’s futurological claims of newness and 
innovation. Although it undermined the cult of originality through 
its reproductive techniques, as with Benjamin, the computer had its 
own capacity through its expanding protean character and rampant 
evolution to produce unique and original forms. As mentioned in 
the first chapter, many computer artists, technologists, and scientists 
saw themselves as the new techno-avant-garde. Like the modernist 
avant-garde, computer artists saw themselves as invading unknown 
territory, conquering, as Habermas wrote, “as yet unoccupied 
future[s]” and recognizing directions in “a landscape into which no 
one seems to have yet ventured.”112
Part of computer art’s modernist historicizing model was the 
direct attempt to prepare a history of art production by tracing it 
to earlier forms of abstraction, especially constructivist modernist 
movements. In Franke’s early history, a bridge was constructed 
from early abstract movements such as constructivism to 1960s 
computer art, which was reinforced by later commentators. As a way 
to legitimize the form, Franke and others constructed a genealogy 
by showing that it had evolved from past forms, thus historically 
situating computer art within the history of art. Rosalind Krauss 
noted this modernist impulse in her analysis of contemporary 
sculpture:
No sooner had minimal sculpture appeared on the horizon of 
the aesthetic experience of the 1960s than criticism began to 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 225
construct a paternity for this work, a set of constructivist fathers 
who could legitimize and thereby authenticate the strangeness of 
these objects.113
Apart from its modernist historical framework, computer art 
continued to be dominated by formal aesthetics. Even though there 
was no agreement on specific aesthetic criteria, abstraction and 
formalism dominated computer art right through the 1980s, despite 
a shift away from the purity of formalism. Nevertheless, at the same 
time the, reductive and austere traits of modernism also gave way 
to the postmodernist idiom of pastiche and appropriation. The 
predominant attitude of postmodernist theorists was that formalism 
was a throwback to outmoded modernist aesthetics.
Predisposed by postmodernism, the new critics saw computer art as 
a nostalgic revival of modernism. This is why many mainstream critics 
described computer art as anachronistic. Jasia Reichardt positively 
described computer art as the “last stand” of abstract art, while Roy 
Ascott dismissed the conventional and crude use of the computer 
because it rehearsed and reiterated the “strategies of modernism 
and formalism.”114 Youngblood, in the early 1980s, pointed out 
that computer art was understood and put into the “service of those 
very same visual art traditions which the rhetoric of new technology 
holds to be obsolete.”115 Therefore, with computer art so entrenched 
within the modernist tradition, the new theorists saw it as their task 
to bring computer art under the rubric of postmodernism. For Art 
Forum , Kate Linker construed this ultimate disjuncture between the 
modern and the postmodern vision by comparing the exhibitions 
Cybernetic Serendipity  and Les Immatériaux :
“Cybernetic Serendipity” was launched in the name of Modernity, 
an ideal that, since the time of Descartes, has focused on the 
will and creative powers of the human subject … Underlying 
it was the premise of “technoscience” as a prosthetic, or aid, 
to universal mastery; the cybernetic revolution appeared to 
accomplish man’s aim of material transformation, of shaping the 
world in the image of himself.116
The earlier exhibition was firmly framed within the modernist 
paradigm while Les Immatériaux  captured, with its decentered, 
nonlinear construction and with its famous postmodern curator, a 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 226
particular postmodern moment.
Popper was right to allude to the incompatibility of computer art 
with the postmodernist project because computer art was heavily 
invested in the modernist paradigm. Whereas computer artists 
celebrated technological progression, postmodernists turned away 
from what they saw as technocratic purism. Presenting computer 
art as an essential postmodernist strategy was problematic on 
many levels. Although there were undoubtedly some features that 
brought it under the rubric of the postmodern, the attempt to align 
computer art with postmodern preoccupations tended to be faddish. 
Those who had espoused postmodernism used critical theory in 
an uncritical and eclectic way. The new computer art theorists 
and commentators did not fully develop the critical approaches 
of contemporary art theorists and critics; rather they picked and 
chose the most suitable elements from postmodern criticism while 
ignoring the incompatible aspects.
The postmodernists essentially denied the link with modernism 
by placing computer art’s genealogy within the historical context 
of disruptive technologies, primarily photography. However, the 
postmodernists’ way of theorizing contemporary photography was 
not as adaptable as they assumed and offered a poor model and 
ill-fitting paradigm for the critique of computer art. For example, 
the postmodernist critics ignored the inherent differences in each 
technological form. Computer art, although mechanical, could 
not make the truth claims of photography. Although it shared 
origins in science and technology discourse, the computer did not 
originate from a visual heritage, rather it was from the beginning 
fully symbolic. At its beginnings, computer art was not naturally 
pictorial and did not have that almost immediate recourse to 
portraiture, as photography had. And computer imagery did not 
have the same causal link to natural phenomena or to the genre 
of landscape that photography shared with painting. Furthermore, 
through the semiology of Roland Barthes and the cultural analysis 
of Benjamin, the photograph had become not just an aesthetic 
object, but a medium in which to explore theoretical matters.
Yet there were historical similarities that were missed by the 
theorists. Like the birth of photography, computer art was invented 
by individuals with scientific or technical backgrounds, and the first 
photographers, like the first computer artists, began by mimicking 
well-established genres with simple forms of appropriation.
CRITICAL  IMPACT 227
Computer art also differed from the overt polemics of 
postmodernism. In the early 1980s, art critics such as Donald 
Crimp, Hal Foster, Rosalind Krauss, and Craig Owens gave the 
debate on postmodernism a new, political direction. Their politics 
were based on poststructuralist theory and the Foucauldian 
belief in the interconnectedness of representation and power. As 
mentioned before, early computer art had been ostensibly apolitical. 
Historically, computer art theory was relatively unaffected by the 
social and political radicalism that permeated the society in which 
it emerged. In computer art and the writings that accompanied 
it, there was no intellectual critique of modern states and their 
institutional ideologies. Feminism had little effect, at least until 
the 1980s, even though women had played a significant part in 
the art form’s development and dissemination. Computer art was 
conceptually and theoretically pedestrian in the light of the new 
social and political agendas emerging in contemporary visual arts. 
Furthermore, computer artists were still attempting to gain access 
to the institutions by arguing their case for legitimacy through 
modernist normative approaches. The content of computer art 
was far removed from the politically radical, anti-authoritarian, 
photograph-based art of Martha Rosler, Sherrie Levine, Barbara 
Kruger, and Cindy Sherman. Nevertheless, postmodernists such as 
Cox, Lovejoy, and Binkley all alluded to these artists when arguing 
for the computer to be inducted into the realm of the postmodern. 
Although the association was made, there were no examples of 
computer artists with any overt political message that would 
coincide with contemporary postmodern photography.
From a postmodernist point of view, if computer art could be 
labeled irrelevant for its disconnectedness with social and political 
concerns and its lack of cultural polemics, it also came under attack 
from postmodernism’s characteristic anti-technology stance. Cox 
recognized this contradiction:
Many view electronic/computer media as evil, as a primary 
contribution to the negation of humanism. This technophobic 
attitude handicaps any emerging technological aesthetic. 
Unfortunately, computer art was born in the transition between 
modernism and postmodernism. While both paradigms broach 
computer art issues, for the most part these issues have been 
relegated to technological biases.117
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 228
For Cox, computer art was the “orphan child” of both “high 
modernist and contemporary art criticism.”118 While it was 
“shunned” by the modernists for its “lack of purity, authorship, 
or originality,” it was also avoided by the postmodernists for its 
strong identification with technology.119 Computer art’s emphasis 
on technology presented a major impediment. Many “postmodern 
critics would be dismayed,” Cox believed, at the way “computer 
art segregates itself via the medium rather than concentrates on 
the artist’s ‘aesthetic activities.’”120 Cox went on to remind her 
reader that interdisciplinary activity, one of the “key descriptors” 
of postmodernism, “prohibits the classification of works merely by 
the medium.”121
There were inherent contradictions in employing the intellectuals 
and theorists of postmodernism to emphasize the importance of new 
forms of technological art. From its very beginnings, postmodernism 
embodied a strong current of technological pessimism. Technology 
as a cynical power inhabits the work of Michel Foucault, Jacques 
Derrida, Roland Barthes, Jean Baudrillard, Jean-François Lyotard, 
Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari, and later Paul Virilio. In varying 
ways, the thinkers represented technology, in its contemporary 
form, as a potential threat to humanity’s existence. Within the 
strong tradition of anti-humanism among French intellectuals, 
there had been a sustained critique of instrumental or technical 
reason. For the humanists and anti-humanists alike, the computer 
became symbolic of modern rationality and instrumental control. 
These sentiments formed the foundation of postmodernism’s anti-
humanist tendencies. Like the majority of French poststructualists, 
Lyotard took a cynical view of technoscience and was influenced 
by the anti-technology sentiment of Heidegger, who described 
technology as the affirmation of inhumanity.122 Jacques Ellul also 
influenced Lyotard’s skeptical attitude toward free technological 
development. Lyotard’s reservations about the implication of 
technological change are expressed most forcefully in The Inhuman  
(1991), in which he accused technoscience of “marginalising 
the human at the expense of computer technology.”123 In The 
Postmodern Condition  (1984), the seminal postmodern text widely 
used by the new theorists of computer art, the computer and its 
instrumental nature came under pointed criticism. For Lyotard, 
computer technology and information processing were part of 
the revolution that altered the status and form of knowledge. The 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 229
consequence was that knowledge in the postmodern/post-industrial 
age must be “translatable into computer language.”124 For Lyotard, 
this led to the “hegemony of computers”125 and the comprehensive 
“computerization of society.”126 The correlation of knowledge 
and computing had for Lyotard significant political consequence. 
Knowledge as an information commodity became an increasingly 
contested terrain, and the question of control and access became 
a matter of the politico-economic elite who controlled advancing 
technology and science. Thus, the post-industrial society was 
dominated by the spirit of “performativity,” which attempted to 
reduce society to an efficient system, founded on the best possible 
input/output calculation.127
What the new postmodernists of computer art failed to 
acknowledge was that computer art developed out of those very 
institutions and systems that postmodern theorists such as Lyotard 
had persistently critiqued. Many artists worked with and for the 
large multinational corporations that the postmodern theorists 
criticized. Computer art, if we take Malina’s and Franke’s examples, 
could be seen in a Lyotardian sense as a narrative within the 
metanarrative of science that was seeking to legitimize both science 
and technology in the modern state. After all, computer science’s 
initial impulse was to use computer art as the humanizer and 
popularizer of the new technodigital world.
The postmodernists also described how computer imagery and 
mediated environments constituted current understandings of 
cultural simulations, and how these processes fit the Baudrillardian 
concept of simulacra. Cox conflates scientific visualization, which 
simulated natural phenomena, with the postmodern cultural 
concept of simulacra, which removed the individual from the 
direct experience of reality. Instead of being part of the vocabulary 
of critical theory, terms like “simulacra” were transformed 
into emblems of a new, positive, and affirming digital order. 
Likewise, Lovejoy employed Baudrillard’s new conception of the 
simulacrum to describe the critical challenges awakened by new 
electronic imaging capabilities, but was unable to describe what 
those challenges were. For these commentators, discourse on 
cultural simulation becomes a link to the larger critical discourse 
of postmodernism, of which Baudrillard had become a significant 
exponent. There is no intention to employ Baudrillard’s model or 
deal with his more general criticism of mass media and technology. 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 230
Both Jameson and Baudrillard took a dim view of mass media 
culture in which the new postmodern theorists situated computer 
art. Baudrillard condemned advanced technologies for their part 
in the information-saturated, hyperreal, post-industrial world. For 
Baudrillard, electronic technologies were part of the collapse of 
meaning in the media world. The apocalyptic vision of Baudrillard’s 
media-inundated world contrasted significantly with the celebrated 
electronic and digital world of the postmodernist commentators. 
While Baudrillard believed that the revolution in electronic 
technologies had made us victims of technological determinism, 
the commentators were more likely to take a more McLuhanesque 
utopian view of the electronic revolution. Skeptical of technology 
and the inherent structures of communication and mass media, 
Baudrillard viewed the present age as a “neo-capitalist cybernetic 
order that aims at total control.”128 Whereas Baudrillard lamented 
a world dominated by “cybernetic orders,” cybernetics continued 
to hold a central position from which to understand computer art, 
even as late as the 1980s.
While postmodernism on the whole was incompatible with 
computer art, a number of characteristics within computer art 
were favorable to its induction into the postmodern cultural 
omnium. However, they went unremarked by computer critics and 
art theorists of the 1970s. First, postmodern theory signaled that 
individualism or personal identity, central to modernism, was as 
Jameson suggested, a “thing of the past” that the “old individual 
or individualist subject” was “dead.”129 Sherrie Levine posited a 
refusal of authorship through the rejection of all notions of self-
expression and originality. Computer artists and commentators 
had, from the beginning, celebrated the fact that the computer 
questioned the artist’s role in production and creativity. The 
humanist commentators of the 1960s and 1970s bemoaned the 
displacement of the artist. Because computer art questioned the 
privileged philosophical and political status of the subject, it 
incurred the criticism of many humanists. Artificial intelligence 
decentered the subject. Knowledge, for the artificial intelligence 
exponents, was not based on a finite or contingent subject, but 
on what could emerge from an intelligent machine. For the anti-
humanists, however, the artificial intelligence project remained 
comfortably within the boundaries of the humanist tradition. The 
computer continued as an instrument for the empirical study of 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 231
man and never strayed from the narratives and ideologies of the 
Enlightenment, which reinforced the centrality of the subject.
Second, computer art had a history of appropriation. While 
many computer art critics lamented the regurgitation of old styles, 
postmodernist theorists such as Jameson had stipulated that 
“stylistic innovation is no longer possible” and “all that is left is 
to imitate dead styles.”130 Over a decade before Sherrie Levine 
famously appropriated photographs from celebrated masters, Noll 
appropriated Mondrian’s modern masterpiece, much to the distrust 
of the art establishment. Admittedly, Noll’s work was framed within 
the scientific paradigm of experimental psychology. In addition, the 
act of appropriation or mimicry had no political intention and did 
not parody the stylistic mannerism. It was more an act of homage 
and an attempt to illustrate the computer’s powers of simulation. 
Although Noll’s work had none of the irony or indeterminacy 
of Levine’s, it did manifest the deconstructive sensibility of 
postmodernism.
Third, computer art was a new form of mass art. The idea 
had always been firmly embedded in computer art discourse 
since the early writings of Waldemar Cordeiro and others. Its 
source can also be traced back to the aims of the constructivists 
and their democratic ideals for industrialized art production. 
Postmodernism was also interested in the idea of mass art, and the 
computer’s reproductive and communication capabilities were the 
most significant factor the new postmodernist commentators used 
to claim computer art as a postmodern art form. Computer art, 
with its long-established dream of a mass audience, was posited as 
another measure in the democratization of art. In the Lucas study, 
the importance of the widespread dissemination of art was again 
raised when the computer’s unique qualities were mentioned. For 
postmodernists like Binkley, the interconnectivity of individuals in 
self-styled information systems meant a future that was “outside 
the control of large institutions.”131 The situation where artists 
needed sponsorship and technical assistance from large computer 
companies was always looked upon with disdain by the art world. 
For Lovejoy, following Benjamin, computer art with its potential 
for widespread dissemination now had an increased social function 
and “currency in the public consciousness.”132 For Lovejoy, the new 
trends meant that the cultural sphere was “broadened, enriched, 
and democratized.”133 She also recognized the possibility that 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 232
computer technology, through its dissemination, could reach a 
broader audience and expand beyond the confines of the gallery 
system. With more powerful home computers and graphics 
software, Csuri believed that a “computer folk art”—an “art of the 
people”—would emerge.134 Paul Brown, in an important polemic 
essay first published in 1989, also called for computer art to break 
the “stranglehold of the gilded frame and bypass the parasitic high 
priests and culture vultures to establish an egalitarian art for and by 
the people … an art from the grassroots of democracy.”135
While critical discourse initiated a significant trend toward 
plurality in expression and modes of production, its effect on the 
orthodox faction within computer art was less pervasive. For them, 
postmodern discourse was an unwelcome addition to computer art. 
While many postmodernists, for example Smith, looked upon the 
pioneering computer art with scorn, many pioneering computer 
artists felt that the early forms were truer to the uniqueness of 
computer art. Csuri believed that the “earlier works of art in this field 
exemplified much more potential” than current manifestations.136 
There were other counter responses, from Paul Brown for instance, 
with beliefs in 1989 that computer artists “shouldn’t waste their 
time trying to convince the arts mainstream of the value of their 
work.”137 In direct opposition to Smith’s position, Brown believed 
that computer art’s involvement in SIGGRAPH, Ars Electronica, 
ISEA, and other events represented a vital Salon des Refusés , a 
grouping of those who had not been taken by the pretensions of the 
mainstream art world.138 Roger Malina also noted the increasing 
influence of the then “fashionable French philosophers” at art-and-
technology conferences.139 Brown felt that the “postmodern dogma” 
of the early 1980s had less sympathy and gave less “support for 
the high-modernist formalism of system art.”140 The move toward 
the postmodern worldview meant that art education programs for 
computer art ultimately suffered, and as Brown points out with 
some bitterness, Slade’s Computer Department closed in 1981.141 
Brown explains the alignment of postmodernism with new interface 
programs:
 … 1981 was also the year that IBM released the PC and, by 
the mid-80s affordable computers with lots of “user friendly” 
software were on the market. Ironically, the art mainstream, 
who had never endorsed the work of the systems artists, fell over 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 233
itself to accommodate the neat little postmodern appropriations 
that were created using digital darkroom software (and with 
a singular lack of consideration for the unique and intrinsic 
capabilities of the computational metamedium). Baudrillard 
said it was OK and postmodernism, in its guise as romantic self-
indulgence, concurred.142
Although critical theory had a certain fracturing and diversifying 
effect, bringing political consciousness and contextual understanding 
to computer art, it certainly did not take over as the dominant 
paradigm in which computer art was understood. While computer 
art did gain from the erosion of the older distinction between high 
art and mass culture—a by-product of postmodernism—many felt 
that the computer and its essential algorithmic form was increasingly 
lost to pluralist trends. Diane Fenster, who became an important 
exponent of the digital collage style, said that she had been “fighting 
the bad press engendered by the original computer art, [which had 
been] done by programmers rather than artists.”143 Fenster wanted 
viewers to “view computer art based on content and artistic merit 
rather than just on the algorithms used.”144 She went on to accuse 
SIGGRAPH and Ars Electronica of bias toward technique over 
content. For Fenster, “computer art” was a problematic label 
that suggested that the judging and criticism should be based on 
technique. Under these circumstances “it is not an art competition,” 
but a “programming or engineering competition.”145 The bias 
toward artist-programmers prompted Fenster to spend less time 
trying to enter computer-based competitions and more time focusing 
on the “fine art world,” where she finally found acceptance in the 
photographic periodical Aperture .146
As the computer medium expanded, the term “computer art” 
became less meaningful. Faced with an ever-growing field, many 
artist-programmers felt the need to rearticulate the essential 
features of the computer. Like the postmodernists, they effectively 
abandoned the term. For artist-programmers, the term did not 
distinguish effectively those who formulated their own programs 
(or art systems) from those who used predefined software packages. 
In the 1989 issue of Leonardo , Judson Rosebush wrote the “The 
Proceduralist Manifesto” to remedy the lack of understanding 
within the “art industry” and point to the “germane aesthetic issues” 
at the core of computer-made art.147 Mirroring previous modernist 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 234
movements, Rosebush wrote the manifesto as both an announcement 
of his intentions and an explanation to the art community and to 
the public. For Rosebush, the term “computer art” with its varying 
applications had become a “meaningless term” because it lacked 
the precision and did not accommodate or describe those aspects 
of the computer medium that made it a “unique movement in the 
world of art.”148 Rosebush felt that the aesthetic in computer art was 
intrinsically related to the computer itself—a sentiment common 
amongst artist-programmers. This differs from the postmodernist 
position, which valued the computer as a communication tool and 
an aid to image production and manipulation. Valuing technological 
transparency, the postmodernist rejected any medium-based purism.
For purist artist-programmers, such as Rosebush, the computer 
had an exclusive algorithmic quality that made it unique as a 
movement. His new art-based term “proceduralism,” invented to 
capture the underlying nature of computer production, defined 
itself against the “interactive paintbox,” which for him simply 
simulated “classical painting methods.”149 Importantly, the self-
styled algorithm, compared to commercial software, introduced 
a whole new class of images. Rosebush used fractals as a prime 
example of this revolutionary image. Likewise, the fractal artist F. 
Kenton Musgrave was an adherent to the proceduralist’s cause.150 
By “disallowing post-process meddling or local intrusions and 
modifications,” Musgrave believed he reached a certain “purity” 
through the algorithmic process.151
By the close of the 1980s, artist-programmers were increasingly 
mythologizing the algorithmic process. Roman Verostko and Jean-
Pierre Hébert played a significant role in theorizing the importance 
of the algorithmic process in the following decade.152 For Verostko, 
there was no computer-generated art that is not algorithmic.153 
To achieve “individual algorithmic style,” the artists needed to 
“customize” their own algorithmic procedures.154 It was the 
“individualized stylistic features” and the interaction “with the 
algorithm itself” that gave the artist freedom to “proceed further 
into the new frontiers.”155 The algorithm, for Verostko, invited us 
to “savor the mystery” of the coded procedure and its “stark logic” 
that for him yielded beauty.156
The purity of algorithmic process was increasingly associated 
with generative art systems in the last years of the decade. In 
large part this was a result of the newest technoscience paradigm 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 235
“artificial life,” which was officially founded in 1987 at the Los 
Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. Through the 
popularity of genetic algorithms and other forms of genetic 
programming, scientists and technologists in the late 1970s began 
to recognize the potential for a deeper understanding of biology 
through artificial systems. Through paradigms like cybernetics and 
chaos theory, the workings of biology were closely correlated to 
the mechanics of information. Increasingly, the basis of life was 
seen as a digital process. Within the new interdisciplinary field of 
artificial life, exponents believed that they could create, through a 
materialistic and reductive method, a new class of organism in a 
nonorganic structure. By extracting the logical principles of nature 
and correctly digitizing them, the artificial life pioneers hoped to 
produce with some fidelity the properties of living systems.
The basic analogy made between computational and biological 
processes had been implicit in computer science ever since its 
emergence. In fact, the dream of conflating artificial systems and 
life can be traced back to Enlightenment automata. Nevertheless, 
Von Neumann, viewed as the father of artificial life, worked on 
a project of self-reproducing cellular automata in the 1950s, 
which was later built upon by mathematician John Conway in 
a game called “Life.” Paul Brown recorded the effect that John 
Conway’s systems of cellular automata “Life” had on computer 
artists at Slade’s Experimental and Computing Department in 
the 1970s.157
In computer art, there was a natural alignment between the 
idea of the “generative” program and biological growth and 
transformation. As early as 1968, the scientist Petar Milojevi´ c had 
produced an organic flora series. Milojevi´ c made the first attempt 
to represent the mechanisms of organic growth by setting various 
random parameters that mimic branching patterns and stochastic 
behavior in natural form. For the art critic Jonathan Benthall, this 
early work “implied discreetly, rather than asserted” the analogy 
between the computer’s programming instructions and the genetic 
code responsible for evolutionary specificity and variety.158 By the 
late 1970s, one of Japan’s most celebrated computer artists and 
animators, Yoichiro Kawaguchi, had developed models based on 
mathematical growth principles that mimic simple patterns found 
in life forms. In 1978 Kawaguchi presented growth algorithms 
that produced biomorphic forms such as spirals. By employing 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 236
the laws underpinning formative patterns, the artist found basic 
principles for design and art generation.159 The resulting art is a 
plethora of forms such as ammonites, nautili, tentacles, plant vines, 
and coral structures. In Tendril  (Figure 5.2) Kawaguchi used a 
series of growth patterns including fractal dimensions to produce 
a vivid organic form. As noted in the previous chapter, the early 
1980s marked a period of intense interest in fractal and biomorphic 
form. Growth algorithms, of which fractals are just one example, 
seemed to offer an interesting future for art. Moreover, fractals had 
always been linked to natural phenomena. Through iterative and 
recursive processes, fractal procedures generated objects which 
show a high resemblance to biological objects. The mathematician 
John Hubbard wanted the viewer to perceive fractal imagery as a 
“metaphor for living things.”160
FIGURE 5.2  Yoichiro Kawaguchi, Tendril,  1981. © Yoichiro Kawaguchi.

CRITICAL  IMPACT 237
With artificial life entering cultural consciousness in the late 1980s, 
the biology metaphor became increasingly evident in computer 
art. Verostko in particular popularized the biological metaphor or 
“form-generating procedures” in his use of the term “epigenetic” 
and his references to Paul Klee’s organic idealism.161 His ideas were 
present in 1988 at the first International Symposium of Electronic 
Art (ISEA) in Utrecht. Verostko linked his art-generating system to 
the biological process of epigenesis by analogy. In genetics, the term 
“epigenesis" is used to describe the process whereby an organism 
(the phenotype) grows (unfolds) from its coded DNA (genotype). In 
Verostko’s model, the software is viewed as the genotype (seed) that 
contains all the information necessary for the mature form (art). 
Verostko’s increased use of concepts from biology was part of a 
wider trend in computer art that started in the late 1960s and saw 
the widespread influence of generative systems emanating from the 
life sciences.
In many ways, computer art developed within the same 
metacreative paradigm as artificial life and shared its basic premise: 
to create a simple abstraction in order to build complex entities. 
Like artificial life practitioners, computer artists yearned to generate 
creation, variation, and otherness. As Mitchell Whitelaw suggested, 
art employing artificial life models was often “founded on a desire 
for emergence, a desire to have novel, unexpected, or unpredictable 
results spring from controlled, designed systems.”162 Even Cohen’s 
AARON, which is situated within artificial intelligence, was 
programmed to be indeterminate and to behave according to the 
processes of life.
While the biological metaphor was more implicit in the work 
of the 1970s, by the 1980s—with growth, fractal, and genetic 
algorithms—the metaphor was fully active.163 However, the most 
pervasive concept to emerge within the late 1980s was that of 
evolution. The evolutionary mechanism, embodied in the computer 
through a simple algorithmic procedure, could create endless 
diversity and highly complex forms. In the late 1980s and early 
1990s, theorists and philosophers investigated the computer 
algorithm in terms of the evolutionary process which, like the 
computer program, was a blind step-by-step mechanical process 
that could yield complex results.
One of the most important shifts for computer art was the work 
of the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins. In preparing his 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 238
influential text The Blind Watchmaker  (1986), Dawkins created 
aesthetic figures by simulating artificial genetics and evolution 
procedures on his computer. Dawkins was seeking to illustrate how 
complexity could be generated by simple rules. By controlling a 
number of parameters on a tree-like structure, such as branching, 
segmentation, and symmetry, Dawkins created graphic organisms 
he called “biomorphs.” These parameters or “genes” were subject 
to artificial selection from a subjective outsider—Dawkins himself. 
Dawkins was astonished at how lifelike and complex the graphics 
became in a matter of a few generations. Significantly, the process of 
evolving these creatures felt, for Dawkins, like “one was not creating 
them but discovering them.”164 As Dawkins wrote, “when you first 
evolve a new creature by artificial selection in the computer model, 
it feels like a creative process.”165
In this system, the creatures already existed, in a mathematical 
sense, as possible permutations on a given set of genes through a 
finite number of mutations. This corresponded to what biologists 
referred to as genetic space, a mathematical atlas that geographically 
located all possible life forms.
This field of logical potential—the theoretical genetic space 
generated by an evolutionary mechanism—had a powerful effect 
on computer artists. After all, the unthought and unseen had always 
been a central mythology within computer art. Daniel Dennett, in 
Darwin ’s Dangerous Idea  (1996), extensively theorized this as 
“Design Space” by eliciting Jorge Luis Borges’ literary metaphor of 
the library of all possible books to theorize the “scope of biological 
possibility.”166 Borges, in his written collection Labyrinths  (1964), 
imagined a library of seemingly infinite books (laid out in a maze 
of corridors and shafts) to explore the notion of logical potentiality. 
Like the Borgian space, the potential for aesthetic form in an 
evolutionary art system was vast. The artist, like the librarians in 
the Borgian library of all possible books, explored and searched 
the labyrinthine maze of computer-generated forms. This space of 
seemingly infinite logical possibilities caught the imagination of 
William Latham.
Following Dawkins’ lead, Latham, with mathematician and 
programmer Stephen Todd, further elaborated the potential 
generating power of evolutionary algorithms.167 Together they 
created a new art system for breeding “synthetic organic forms,” 
or “virtual sculptures” as they became known. Latham and Todd 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 239
gave the name of “Evolutionism” to this “new artistic style,” 
after the distinctive movements of twentieth-century art and the 
particular brand of neo-Darwinism that underpinned much of the 
art-making system. The art, when first exhibited, met with wide 
acclaim, prompting a series of international exhibitions. Beyond 
its interdisciplinary range, the audiences were captivated by the 
evocative and strangely organic forms (Figure 5.3). The latest 
advance of 3-D modeling programs, animation capabilities, color 
definition, texturing, and rendering techniques bolstered the visual 
impact.
Like many of the other computer artists, Latham came to his 
technique via traditional drawing techniques. Through his first 
FIGURE 5.3  William Latham, Standing Horn,  1989. Computer ‘C’ Type, 
59.8 × 58.8 in. © William Latham.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 240
experimental system for art generation, FormSynth, Latham 
discovered the power of simple generative grammar that allowed for 
an inexhaustible reservoir of possibilities. By applying simple rules 
to a series of drawn shapes, the artist could create an evolutionary 
tree of increasingly complex forms. Latham was struck by how the 
simple algorithmic method had a “creative power of their own.”168 
In 1987, as research fellow at IBM, Latham began to realize the 
potential of automating his generative systems via the computer. 
Collaborating with Todd, Latham built three complementary 
artistic systems which were based on the techniques developed in 
artificial life and the latest computer graphics.
Through iterative and recursive computational functions, the 
FormGrow system generated complex forms from a number of 
geometric primitives. The multiple structures, such as horns, twists, 
ribs, and so on, coupled with different number and gene values 
meant a limitless amount of expression. Like Dawkins, Latham 
employed the biological analogy of genotype and phenotype: the 
genes are a particular set of changeable numbers that are linked to 
a (geometric expression) structure, and their interaction produces 
the computer form (the phenotype). Increasing the number of genes 
and changing the structures opened up a vast form space to explore. 
The form generator gave access to a library of possible forms that 
could be searched through artificial breeding. The organic forms, 
like the books in Borges’ imaginary library, are out there logically 
in a vast mathematical space. The artistic interface, named Mutator, 
was a parody of mutation and natural selection, allowing the artist 
to navigate through the multidimensional form space. Mutator 
operated by generating gene values and by a process analogous 
to biological breeding and random mutation, which married and 
mutated forms and then displayed them for the artist to make a 
subjective decision (based on aesthetics). As in Dawkins’ model, 
Latham replaced “survival of the fittest” with “survival of the most 
aesthetic.” Mutator allowed the artist to steer, via feedback, through 
the form-generating system, using it as an exploration tool. Through 
gene interpolation, the program LifeCycle animated these forms and 
showed the forms’ metamorphosis from birth to death (Figure 5.4).
Importantly, as a contrast to other computer art systems, 
Latham’s Mutator interface allowed the artist to avoid the 
analytic knowledge and the structure definitions required within 
the program. The interface permitted a far more intuitive and 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 241
subjective approach. The visual feedback and interaction with 
the computerized art system hearkens back to the artwork from 
the 1970s (such as Mohr’s and Molnar’s) that was the result of 
changed parameters and definitions within the contexts of heuristic 
search modes. Like the systems devised by the artists in the 1970s, 
the art process occurred in two stages: composing a structure and 
then exploring the consequence of that structure. The power of this 
exploratory process, and the new digital aesthetic that it allowed, 
was lost on most mainstream critics.
With the advent of evolutionary algorithm and other metaphors 
stemming from artificial life, the interest in generative systems 
and the possibility for an aesthetic founded on these analogies FIGURE 5.4  William Latham, Breeding Forms on the Infinite Plane,  
1992. Computer image. © William Latham.

WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 242
grew. Biological analogs were relatively recent, compared with 
the use of mathematical operations as a mechanism for computer 
art generation. In the 1989 Leonardo  issue, Franke restated the 
importance of studying “generative mathematics.”169 He stressed 
the point that computer-generated imagery was founded on 
mathematical relations and methods. The same Leonardo  issue also 
had an article by Benoît Mandelbrot, who felt that generative art 
redefined the boundary between “invention” and “discovery.”170 
The prime example was fractal art. The new artists, as he saw it, 
recognized that “very simple mathematical formulas,” which may 
seem “completely barren,” are in fact “pregnant, so to speak, with 
an enormous amount of graphic structure.”171 Roger Malina also 
signaled the move toward “dynamic art subjects,” where generative 
systems produced “families of aesthetically interesting outputs.”172 
Malina recognized that there were a “number of attributes that could 
allow the computer to become a creative art-making machine  rather 
than merely a significant art-making tool.”173 Software, for Malina, 
made possible a “different kind of reproduction”—what he called 
post-mechanical reproduction or “generative reproduction.”174
For the postmodernists, the generative nature of computing and 
an aesthetic founded on the computer algorithm were insignificant 
compared with the computer’s photo-image-manipulating and 
communicating abilities. Gips, writing in Art Journal , recognized 
the impressive manner in which the computer could be used to 
generate images, but argued that when employed in this manner it 
failed to create “meaningful art.”175 The subtle nuances of difference 
between generate and create was at the heart of the “impasse that 
characterized computer art for so long”:
To “generate” means to bring into existence by natural 
processes, while to “create” means to bring something from 
the imagination … [to] … go beyond the aimless adoption of the 
computer as an efficient spawner of images to dazzle the audience 
with visual acrobatics but little else.176
Although there was postmodern opposition to the idea of generative 
art, its position was secured by the growing influence of artificial 
life and the more general cultural fascination with the possibilities 
promised by biotechnologies. Using Verostko’s epigenetic as an 
example, Malina believed that there was a compelling argument to 
CRITICAL  IMPACT 243
suggest that computer art was on the brink of a “new aesthetic.”177 
The importance of an aesthetic based on the algorithmic and 
generative capabilities became increasingly theorized in the 1990s, 
further providing the technoscience underpinning that computer art 
had always existed.
Paradoxically, the postmodernists, following Lyotard’s concept 
of postmodern science, were also embracing certain aspects of 
technoscience. The science of complexity, as mentioned in the 
previous chapter, garnered special positive attention. The openness 
and unpredictability of chaos, and the way it appeared to limit 
human control and undermine totalizing projects, eventually 
became part of the postmodern vernacular. Ultimately the computer, 
which was able to manufacture contingencies and instabilities, was 
at the heart of this trend. However, the conversion of many artists 
and commentators to postmodern criticality had little effect in 
gaining acceptance for computer art in the contemporary art scene. 
While the modernist art historians developed fundamental critiques 
of conventional art history, they still drew from the traditional 
canon of the discipline. For the radical art historians, computer art 
was deemed an artifact not worthy of study. In fact, much radical 
art history in the 1970s and early 1980s had only marginally 
increased the diversity of objects subjected to substantive analysis. 
Indeed, some scholars—T. J. Clark and John Barrell included—
had quite unapologetically “confirmed the value of the narrow 
canon of conventional art history.”178 Thus, the postmodernist 
critics were often as elitist as their modernist counterparts, giving 
their narrow attention to avant-garde photographers and video 
artists. Postmodern politics, with its internal debates, took on an 
increasingly parochial character, with purists such as Crimp and 
Foster emphasizing and celebrating the art of resistance. Computer 
art, for all its postmodern qualities, never gained full critical 
attention. Cultural and media studies, which grew out of the same 
social, political, and intellectual developments as the “new art 
history,” widened the scope of subjects to take into account the 
recent cultural forms and practices in popular culture. However, 
the range of visual culture’s analysis did not extend to computer-
based art.
Although computer art never became part of the postmodern 
canon, postmodernism did change the cultural understanding of 
the computer. Technology was increasingly understood through 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 244
cultural paradigms and discourses. For example, Turkle understood 
computer technology through the paradigms of both modernist 
and postmodernist aesthetics. By the late 1980s, the culture of 
personal computing found itself, according to Turkle, dividing into 
“two cultures”: the IBM reductionist paradigm, characterized by 
deep comprehension; and the Macintosh paradigm, exemplified by 
“simulation and surface.”179 Postmodern theorists suggested that 
the search for depth and mechanism was futile, and that it was more 
important to explore the world of shifting surfaces than to seek 
deep structures. As Turkle stated, the computer began to serve as a 
“carrier object” for cultural ideas.180 This was increasingly reflected 
in computer art, where the way one employed the computer, either 
as artist-programmer or artist user, spoke of a central worldview, be 
it modernist or postmodernist.
One of the major impacts of critical discourse was in the 
new conceptualization of technology toward a multifaceted, 
transformative, individualistic, and politicized instrument. 
Technology, and the computer in particular, was increasingly 
represented as liberating, democratic, and open rather than rational, 
reductive, and centralized, as it had been in the 1960s. Within the 
modernist paradigm, the computer was an instrument for gathering 
knowledge and dominating nature. The humanists deprecated the 
computer for its dehumanizing influence, while the anti-humanists 
came to perceive the computer as a symbol of centralized power 
and authority. Influenced by the anti-humanists, postmodernists 
were also skeptical of the belief in technology as morally neutral. 
However, those who theorized computer and electronic art in 
relation to postmodernism effectively dampened the anti-humanist 
pessimism by seeing technology as personally empowering. By the 
close of the 1980s, computer technology, illustrated in the rise of 
the artist-programmer, moved from the hands of the technocrat and 
from its instrumental paradigm to the hands of the individual in the 
public and cultural sphere. Later, through the Internet, this change 
would become global. The postmodernist realized that information 
technology, in its new personalized form, had a democratizing 
and polemical facet that could disrupt the unique, symbolic, and 
visionary within the modernist paradigm and replace it with 
plurality, connectivity, and contextual understanding. This pluralist 
understanding provided the theoretical framework for digital art 
and new media art in the 1990s.
CRITICAL  IMPACT 245
Through postmodernism there was a shift away from the self-
absorbed and technocratic purism of the artist-programmer toward 
an interest in the vernacular and history. This introduced the 
humanizing narrative element in computer art. Part of this trend was 
the increasing hegemony of photography in critical discourse. With 
the appearance of computer software that digitalized photographic 
imagery for manipulation, computer art became linked to the critical 
discourse and histories of photography. Increasingly, as artists 
used photographic manipulation software, the pluralism of styles 
increased, along with the irony, ambiguity, and contradiction found 
in many postmodern practices. The trend in painting software and 
digital photography precipitated an art based around what Fredric 
Jameson had once described as “pastiche.”181 With the computer, 
it became increasingly easy to mimic styles and mannerisms. 
Disregarding the need for purity and a sense of authorship and 
uniqueness, which the artist-programmers still valued, computer 
artists began sourcing imagery from diverse quarters. Methods of 
critique and appropriation, paramount to the postmodern strategies 
of contemporary photography, became central. Joan Truckenbrod 
was a pioneer of computer-digitalized techniques.182 Truckenbrod 
and other artists such as Nancy Burson and Carol Flax found the 
ability to bring photographic imagery into their work allowed them 
to “deal directly with content and issues current in the art world, 
such as gender, identity, and family structure.”183 Susan Ressler, 
commenting on socio-environmental issues, used a variety of media 
including a video to produce the digital collage Earth 1  (Figure 5.5). 
Digital photography and the pixel-by-pixel mode of manipulation 
and control became increasingly popular. Within five years, digital 
photography and its various modes and practices resulted in a 
number of exhibitions. By the mid-1990s, the digital collage began 
to dominate over art produced by the artist-programmers, as the 
catalog for the 1991 SIGGRAPH exhibition showed.
By the early 1990s, artists working with computers were more 
inclined to talk about social and political realities than about 
the computer and its technical proclivities. This was a result of 
the postmodernist emphasis on content rather than its mode of 
production. While traditionally computer art had taken on the 
modernists’ demand for purity and separateness of medium, 
postmodernist practice was, as Krauss suggested, “not defined in 
relation to a given medium … but rather in relation to the logical 
WHEN  THE MACHINE  MADE  ART 246
operations in a set of cultural terms.”184 “Postmodernist practice 
is no longer organised,” Krauss continued, “around the definition 
of a given medium on the grounds of material, or, for that matter, 
the perception of material.”185 Jenny Holzer’s work was a prime 
example of the more enduring legacy of critical discourse and 
how it changed the perception of technology. Lovejoy signaled 
Holzer as the “first woman artist” chosen to represent the United 
States at the 1990 Venice Biennale and as the “first artist using 
the computer to receive such a distinction.”186 Yet Holzer never 
called herself an electronic artist, let alone a computer artist. Her 
medium, the electronic billboard, was only important in its ability 
to communicate the message. Although the medium, according to 
McLuhan, became the message, there was no desire to adhere to the 
purity of medium for its own sake.
By the 1990s, there was a widespread transdisciplinary 
approach to technology, which coincided with the incorporation 
of political, social, and cultural theory into artistic practice. The 
most recognizable effect of this combined trend was the gradual 
decline of the once autonomous category of computer art and the FIGURE 5.5  Susan Ressler, Earth 1,  1989. © Susan Ressler.

CRITICAL  IMPACT 247
eventual collapse of the term. While the term “computer art” had 
been contested from the beginning, its use had been widespread. 
Computer art was first a loose and ad hoc designation, then 
solidified into a more universal category to authenticate a group 
of scientists and technologists. However, in the 1980s, the term 
was being increasingly replaced with others such as “computer-
assisted art” and “computer-aided art,” effectively asserting the 
artist’s position over the machine. Authors also avoided conflating 
computers and art by drawing a semantic boundary between them, 
titling their publications computers “in” or computers “and” art. In 
1989, Richard Wright began to recognize that the term “computer 
art” was beginning to “drop out of usage.”187 With all the new 
technologies of “image digitalising and processing, animation, 
3-D modelling, paint systems” and many artists operating under 
the banner of “conceptual art, video art, installation” and “Post-
Modernist,” Wright wondered whether it still made sense to “talk 
of ‘computer art.’”188
With the increasing redundancy of the term, the broader field of 
art and technology took in more inclusive terms such as “digital art,” 
“new media,” and “electronic art.” In line with the widening effect 
of postmodernism, there was a move away from modernism’s rigid 
distinctions and categorical and definitive terms. Computer art’s 
modernist compression, focus, and specialization were replaced by 
postmodernist expansion and inclusion. The artist-programmers, 
although sharing the postmodernists’ impulse to abandon the 
term “computer art,” took the opposite approach by defining 
the central aspect of their practice. From 1989, consumed by the 
anxiety over trends in commercial software, orthodox computer 
artists neologized a myriad of art terms and movements, such as 
the proceduralists, dataists, and later the algorists. Many presented 
veiled or forthright criticism of the mounting use of commercial 
software and the commodification of the computer art process. All 
stressing the importance of programming and the metaphor of the 
algorithm, the groups called their art generative art, algorithmic art, 
program art, and many other names.
The increased influence of photographic manipulation software 
such as Photoshop and critical discourse meant that by 1989 there 
were more works with cultural content. Elements such as figuration 
and collage outnumbered the abstract and linear works. In addition, 
there were nearly as many women exhibiting in SIGGRAPH as men. 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 248
By the time of the Digital Salon in 1995, artists using modeling 
and photo-manipulation software far outnumbered artists who 
constructed their own art-making programs. Digital photographic 
imagery became a primary source for computer imagery, and the 
photo-mosaic works alone rivaled the abstract linear and the 3-D 
modeling imagery in these exhibitions, such was their popularity.
In the 1990s the visual arts sphere that now engaged computer 
technology had expanded beyond all recognition. The computer as 
a technology had diversified and converged in so many areas that 
it was impossible to speak of a unified, homogenous movement of 
computer artists. While the orthodox artist-programmer had rallied 
around a relatively cohesive technocratic and modernist vision, 
the influx of critical discourse and its effect on the perception 
of technology eventually laid the ground for today’s pluralistic 
understanding of digital technology. However, this is not to say that 
postmodern pluralism usurped the prime position of technoscience 
within computer-based arts. As with the paradigm of artificial life, 
technoscience remained the main source for their mythology, vision, 
and technical knowledge.
In the Epilogue, fittingly titled “Aftermath,” I examine the 
eventual fate of computer art and its criticism. The movement 
continued, in spite of decline, to resonate enduring ideas. These 
ideas and the history of their development in computer art became 
central. In the late 1990s, for example, the generativists invested 
heavily in both the idea of the algorithm and the evolving notion 
of the generative, while the digital artists underwrote their practice 
with an understanding of the historical dimension of the computer 
and its development as a creative medium. Computer art owes its 
enduring influence and importance to the pioneering artists who 
established the courses, art festivals, institutions, and conferences 
that form a major part of our contemporary digital art landscape. 
Although much of the early computer art is lost, the practice forged 
by those indomitable artists from the often intractable area of early 
computing is a legacy worth elucidating.
The general ambivalence that permeated computer art continued 
undiminished into the 1990s. In every decade since its inception, 
commentators anticipated an era in which computer art would 
finally gain acceptance and validation from the artistic and wider 
cultural community. Habitually, commentators identified computer 
art within an embryonic stage of development. They pointed to 
technological advancements that would someday present a salient 
juncture in its history. The sentiment was no different in the 1990s. 
For example, Clifford Pickover felt that computer-generated 
art would eventually “come of age,” though not until the new 
millennium. As this demonstrates, the eternal deferral of success 
remained a central tenet even as computer art began to fade. As 
Nicholas Lambert observed in 2003, over 30 years ago Franke 
recognized computer art as “the art of tomorrow,” and that is where 
it perpetually remained.1 There was an element of technological 
determinism or naïve teleology in the belief that computer art’s 
viability and success were assured because the computer was an 
agent of social change and progress. They felt that computer art 
was the culmination or end point of art’s technological evolution 
and that art, like society, would be inexorably shaped by the 
dominant technology.
However, computer art’s latent potential, persistently foreseen, 
was never fulfilled. In response to Reichardt’s pronouncement in 
1971 that art movements are remembered through “great works” 
and “exceptional individuals,” there had been a substantial 
body of work, but no defining art.2 In Reichardt’s view, those 
movements that fail to produce great works are fated to “leave 
an incomparably lesser trail.”3 Nonetheless, although computer 
art had produced no masterpieces, Reichardt believed that 
computer art was significant “both socially and artistically.”4 In 
1989, Margot Lovejoy considered anew the question of a canon 
of computer art with a commonly agreed set of masterpieces. She 
believed it was too early to “form judgements” because computer Epilogue: Aftermath
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 250
in the arts was “still at the stage of experimentation.”5 She admits 
that the premature exhibitions of “poor art” based on what she 
saw as “obsolete art issues” has “stigmatized the computer” 
and the field generally.6 She believed that historical perspective 
was necessary. Writing in the new millennium, Mike King again 
approached the issue first raised by Reichardt and later by Lovejoy 
of identifying computer art masterworks. He believed that while 
there was a “substantial body of fine work” at the dawn of the 
new millennium, there was, he stated with despondency, “no great 
masterpieces of computer art.”7 Pioneering artists such as Mark 
Wilson have stated even more recently that “computer artists 
probably had overly optimistic expectations for the medium.”8 He 
felt that the utopian quest “to create a distinctive ‘computer’ style” 
was at that point a fading dream, and in retrospect some of the 
work “has been a failure.”9
Following the 1989 crisis there was further fragmentation. By 
the close of the 1980s, computer art had made little impact on 
the fine art arena. Ominously, the Computer Arts Society bulletin, 
PAGE , which had been so important in the UK, ceased production. 
While video art had found commercial and critical success and 
matured as an art form, computer art remained alienated. Even in 
the late 1980s, with the enthusiasm for the new personal computer, 
there were skeptics in the arts who saw the computer, according 
to Timothy Binkley, as an “inhuman technological monster.”10 The 
ceaseless technophobia surrounding computer art drove many 
artists, such as William Latham, to abandon the art world for 
commercial fields. Following the 1989 crisis, although there was 
an introduction of new modes of criticism and a renewed desire for 
consensus, there was also, as Delle Maxwell wrote, “something in 
computer art that still remains rather elusive.”11 Maxwell, writing 
in the early 1990s, felt that the dissatisfaction with computer art 
was a wider phenomenon: “These aren’t just the grumbling of the 
general public; artists, enthusiasts, and engineers alike join in mutual 
complaint.”12 Whether it was conflict between the “technical-
minded factions” who coded their art and the artists who used the 
“canned paint” systems, the lack of self-conscious critical reflection 
in this “isolated small community,” the “bad critical reception” of 
what was called “spin art” by some “uniformed, myopic” critics, 
or the problems between the art world and the graphic industry, 
EPILOGUE 251
Maxwell believed it was the lack of aesthetic standards and self-
reflection within computer arts that ultimately impeded the 
movement.13 With no market share and no constituency collecting 
computer artworks, some exponents wondered if computer art 
would remain a category.14
In 1996, in an Internet blog, Lev Manovich provocatively 
proclaimed the death of computer art. He argued that the 
potential convergence of the art world and computer art would 
never eventuate.15 Manovich believed two irreconcilable spheres 
were in “battle”: the Duchampian world, which characterized 
the contemporary art community, and the Turing world, which 
encompassed computer art and its supporting institutions such as 
ISEA, Ars Electronica, and SIGGRAPH. For Manovich, the content-
driven and self-referential aspect of contemporary art with its 
postmodern irony is diametrically opposed to the state-of-the-art, 
technology-inspired art, which, lacking the complexities of irony, 
was ostensibly research-driven. Manovich felt that contemporary 
computer art was too serious, as opposed to the Art and Technology 
movement of the 1960s, which had a sense of playfulness and 
whimsicality. Another criticism that Manovich voiced was the belief 
that computer artists failed to problematize the issues surrounding 
their technology, such as the reality that computer technology was 
“highly unreliable, transient, and incomplete.”16
While Manovich’s generalization mirrored the interminable 
Two Cultures  debate and missed some of the diversity of 
computer art practice, his recognition of the division and the 
underlying tensions was largely valid. By 1995, Prince felt that 
the fundamental questions regarding the status of computer art’s 
originality and whether one should program or use commercially 
available software remained unresolved.17 Through the 1990s, the 
two factions that constituted the orthodox artist-programmers 
and the artists using commercial software remained strong. 
Orthodox computer artists continued to emphasize originality and 
integrity through the development of personalized programs, while 
deriding those who produced what was disdained as “canned” 
art.18 Artist-programmers such as Hébert were disenchanted 
with the commodification of computer art through the influx of 
personal computers and commercial software, which resulted in 
low-quality art being produced under the rubric of computer art. 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 252
Hébert was not alone in asserting the individual independent 
algorithmic style of art generation. There was a raft of outspoken 
artist-programmers who would, as Gary Greenfield asserted, 
“militantly” define computer art in programming terms, and 
celebrate only those art forms that could be accomplished through 
an intimate knowledge of the computer.19
The orthodox artist-programmers went about conceptualizing 
their work under the term “algorithmic art.” While the concept of 
the algorithm had been theorized by Verostko at conferences in 
Europe and Australasia since the mid-1980s, it was in Los Angeles 
that the group finally coalesced and the artist group the Algorists 
formed. Like many new art movements, the Algorists formed at the 
outermost peripheries of the art world.20 Under the leadership of 
artists Versotko and Hébert, the Algorists would formalize at the 
1995 Los Angeles SIGGRAPH art exhibition. At the conference 
panel entitled “Algorithms and the Artist,” the creative potential 
of the algorithm as a generator of artistic form was theorized and 
debated by Stephen Bell, Peter Beyls, Brian Evans, Ken Musgrave, 
Hébert, and Verostko. Hébert recalled a heightened sense of 
congeniality among this gathering of artists, while Veroskto felt 
a passionate desire to give proper identity to a unique practice, 
a working methodology he had intellectually engaged with for 
more than a decade. Following the conference, Verostko, who 
had experience as an encyclopedist and art historian, would 
carefully trace the complex etymology of the word “algorithm” 
back to the ninth-century Persian mathematician Muhammad 
al-Khwarizmi, who is credited with providing the step-by-step 
rules for adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing ordinary 
decimal numbers. For the movement’s founders, Muhammad 
al-Khwarizmi was the first Algorist and proof that the concept 
had ancient lineage. By concentrating on the algorithm, the 
artist-programmers identified the core concepts fundamental 
to mathematics and computational science. A major part of 
computer science research was devoted to the study of the 
algorithm and its structures, efficiency, and inherent limitations. 
The algorithm became the spirit of computer science. Verostko 
and Hébert linked the algorithm to previous methodologies in art, 
both ancient and modern. Importantly, the Algorists were formed 
to differentiate themselves from the majority of other computer 
artists and clarify the position of each other’s work within the 
EPILOGUE 253
group. More of a group than a movement, the Algorists included 
other significant artist-programmers such as Csuri, Mohr, Wilson, 
and Musgrave.
The lack of consensus, the competing ideology, and the rhetorical 
debates seemed to confirm the decline of computer art. One of the 
most substantial shifts for computer art in the 1990s was that from 
being a relatively autonomous subject in the 1970s and 1980s, it 
was now relegated to a position where it merely complemented 
other discourses. No longer did book-length publications appear 
on computer art, like those that had been written at the nadir of its 
fortunes. Now computer art was subsumed under electronic, and 
then digital, art. In Frank Popper’s influential Art of the Electronic 
Age (1993), computer art was one form within a spectrum of other 
electronic art forms. By the late 1990s, the term “computer art” was 
used mostly as a historical term to denote the pioneering efforts 
of artists using computers.21 In Michael Rush’s New Media in 
Late 20th Century Art  (1999), the term was employed in a similar 
historical way; significantly, though, computer art was placed in the 
larger history of digital art.22 Likewise, the new exhibiting initiatives 
and institutional courses that began in the 1990s acquired the title 
“digital art” or “new media art.”
The transition from “computer” to “digital” is best illustrated 
in the formation of the New York Digital Salon in 1993. In the 
early 1980s, the term “computer art” was the central descriptive 
term in degrees offered by the newly formed Institute for Computer 
in the Arts, at the School of Visual Arts, New York. In the early 
1990s, the New York Digital Salon, which grew out of the School 
of Visual Arts in New York, began using the term “digital art,” 
reflecting current shifts in terminology. The Salon posited the late 
1980s as the beginning of digital art, when the first significant wave 
of digital art emerged through affordable personalized hardware 
and the development of sophisticated drawing, painting, and 3-D 
software. Even though the Computer Art Department still used 
the term “computer art” in the 1990s, the term specified what was 
becoming commonly associated with digital art, including animation 
production, Web-based art, CD-ROMs, gallery installations, digital 
video, and performances.
This shift in terminology from “computer” to “digital” was 
part of a larger cultural trend. When one spoke of digital, it 
conjured, as Charlie Gere suggested, a “whole panoply of virtual 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 254
simulacra, instantaneous communication, ubiquitous media and 
global connectivity that constitutes much of our contemporary 
experience.”23 The shift to digital art arose not only from the 
perceived lack of meaning and mechanistic association, but also 
from the need to dispense with the gender connotations that the 
term “computer” had accumulated in its early history.
The 1990s saw a diminishing use of the term. Ars Electronica , 
for example, preferred the term “digital art.”24 Computer art 
commentators such as Patric Prince followed suit.25 Consequently, 
as has been confirmed by recent publications, “computer art” is now 
consigned to the role of a periodizing term. It distinguishes a pioneering 
movement and has become a symbol of the technological past.
By the mid-1990s, the artist-programmers and the closely aligned 
plotter artists and Algorists were viewed as increasingly outmoded. 
Even as early as 1988, as indicated by the SIGGRAPH exhibition 
of that year, interactivity had become the international paradigm of 
interest. Rather than contemplating the two-dimensional computer-
generated images, which were once the traditional and most 
widespread computer art form, the viewer was now transformed 
into an interactive actor in the creation of the artwork itself. 
Interactive interfaces and newly engineered input devices made 
two-dimensional static imagery appear antiquated and hopelessly 
redundant. In the 1990s, festivals such as Ars Electronica favored 
new media work over the traditional computer genres of drawing, 
painting, and sculpture.
Although there were important forums such as the 
“Computerkunst” for traditional computing techniques, overall 
static computer-generated art forms were now struggling to find 
welcoming venues. Verostko revealed:
These juried showings provided a forum for exhibiting fine art 
objects at a time when other “computer art” venues abandoned 
“hang it on the wall art objects” in favor of virtual art and/or 
strictly “plugged in” art. Aside from SIGGRAPH, the Digital 
Salon in New York, and occasional specialized shows, the venues 
for showing “hang it on the wall” algorithmic art became more 
and more restrictive.26
By the 1990s, the plotter, which was seen by orthodox exponents 
as closer to traditional practice, was increasingly romanticized and 
EPILOGUE 255
idealized as the first classical computer imaging device. The Golden 
Plotter Award, which had been an annual event at the computer 
art show in Gladbeck, Germany, since the 1980s, provided 
encouragement for many artists whose work may not otherwise 
have been seen. However, the plotter was already giving way to 
new technology, such as ink jet technology and laser printers. The 
HP plotters, which were widely used by the artists, were being 
phased out in the mid-1990s. The drawing plotter was becoming 
obsolete, and in doing so would bring to a close a unique mode 
of production. Ironically, because the plotter has become a 
technological relic, plotted art currently has the strongest market 
among early computer artworks. If one visits the studios of Hébert, 
Wilson, or Verostko today, you have the sensation that you are in 
a museum dedicated to the now defunct plotter industry. Moving 
through their studio—as you pass the archaic technology carefully 
stored and other peripheries that remain dutifully functional—it 
becomes a curious exercise in computer archaeology.
Sadly, the fate of many computer artists seemed tied to the 
obsolescence of computer technology. In the 1990s, Musgrave 
found it regrettable that the “vast majority of practicing ‘computer 
artists’ will always use such ‘canned,’ pre-existing software.”27 He 
went on to say that artist-programming “will always exist and 
be practiced on the fringes.”28 However, he laments that “a full 
appreciation” of the art form requires background in “mathematical 
logic, natural sciences, and computer science, as well as aesthetic 
training and sensitivity.”29 Regarding the reception he received from 
the mainstream art world, Musgrave remained bitter, feeling that 
critics did not possess the will or desire to understand his work. To 
be a pioneer was to be, as he described, “the ones with the arrows 
in our backs.”30
The rapidly expanding digital realm, the negligible influence of 
the now increasingly marginal artist-programmer, the increasingly 
obsolete, static fine-art works, and the constant criticism levelled 
at computer art should all doubtless lead to the conclusion that 
computer art—in Manovich’s terms—had in fact expired. However, 
this conclusion is too simplistic and does not take into account the 
level of investment that artists and theorists brought to their work. 
Although the term “digital art” eventually became the common 
term, there were institutions and exhibitions that still used the 
term “computer art” throughout the 1990s. Most often, these 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 256
organizations were established in the 1970s and early 1980s when 
the term was still prominent; they merely continued the tradition. 
Although many computer art journal publications ceased in the 
1980s and 1990s, there were some that resisted the trend, such 
as the Computer Art Journal  (CAJ) in France, edited by Bernard 
Caillaud. Although the organizers of the 2008 Computer Art 
Congress, a large-scale international conference, debated changing 
the name, they resisted trends and chose not to.
While computer art still existed in the 1990s, it was a fragment 
of its former self. Apart from the discourse of digital art using 
computer art’s history, the 1990s saw technoscience paradigms 
also incorporate its central tenets. Whereas photo-mosaic, 3-D 
modeling and the painting software came under the rubric of 
digital art, the algorithmic-based art was increasingly considered 
within the discourse of generative art. The generative art discourse 
arose out of the increasing interest in artificial life, which was the 
dominant technoscience paradigm of the decade. Throughout the 
1990s, the interest in generative systems would permeate other 
artistic domains, leading to a number of conferences on the subject. 
A new generation of computer-based artists celebrated the ability to 
invoke what the generative discourse termed emergence and endless 
excess in a dynamic and evolving digital world.
Significantly, those who began to formalize generative art 
discourse in the 1990s historicized the concept rather than the 
technology. This trend was previously formalized by the Algorists 
with their conceptualization of the algorithm. Importantly, the term 
“generative” linked the procedural approaches across a variety of old 
and new media. Thus, the idea of the generative became a conceptual 
umbrella for an assortment of different technoscience-inspired 
practices, which included artificial life, catastrophe theory, chaos 
and complexity, fractals, and generative mathematics. Importantly 
for the orthodox computer artist-programmers, who were not 
content with computer art discourse, generative art offered new 
conceptual paths. Also attractive was the fact that the algorithmic 
imperative was central to the concept of generative systems. The 
term “generative,” like “algorithmic,” described a broad process that 
incorporated the multiplicity of techniques and applications, rather 
than a term like “computer,” which implied mechanical contrivance.
Like digital art discourse, generative art subsumed the history 
of computer art. First, generative art, like computer art, sought 
EPILOGUE 257
to encapsulate the constructivist and system-building nuances of 
early modernism. It understood generative in terms of generative 
grammar and Chomsky’s linguistic heritage. Second, generative art 
located its lineage in Max Bense’s “generative aesthetics,” Sonia 
Sheridan’s program of “generative systems,” and the research done 
by J. Gips and G. Stiny into algorithmic and generative aesthetics.31
While computer art fragmented into an aggregation of terms, 
and its history was absorbed into new technoscience and technoart 
discourses, there was little reflection on its systematic dismantling. 
Historically, many of the reasons given for computer art’s failure have 
been one-dimensional. Culpability had been assigned to opposing 
factions or groups. The scientists laid blame on the reticent artists, 
and then the artists conferred blame on the early technologists, 
and finally the exponents held responsible the prejudicial art 
critics and wider art community. In the 1990s, Maxwell felt the 
cause of computer art’s nonfulfilment was located in the marketing 
of computer graphics. For Maxwell, the marketeer’s lack of “high 
evaluation standards” resulted in their promotion of “everything 
indiscriminately as art.”32 Using what had been a powerful 
marketing strategy, the graphics industry used artists, Maxwell 
believed, to soften and humanize computers. Furthermore, Maxwell 
felt that is was difficult to filter out trivial work because some of 
these practitioners have long been “entrenched in the computer 
graphic establishment.”33 The result was that while the artists had 
taken control of computer art by “ousting the engineers from the 
limelight,” they, as successors, did not “offer much additional vision, 
innovation, or integrity.”34
While these criticisms are valid, they only deal with the rhetoric 
of computer art at a particular point in its history. The criticism 
does not explain the underlying contradictions at the center of 
computer art’s fluctuating fortunes. Underneath the rhetoric are a 
number of paradoxes that have meant that computer art remained 
a contested cultural practice.
The computer’s spurious beginnings in the military meant 
that it was immediately an anathema to artistic values. But what 
antagonized the arts community the most was the fact that 
technologists and scientists were the first practitioners. Because 
the scientists called their aimless aesthetic testing of computational 
experimentation “art,” the creative community found the scientists 
presumptuous. Bolstering the art critic’s untrusting attitude was 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 258
the divided cultural field, as manifested in the Two Cultures  
debate. The art and science dichotomy has in fact tainted all 
discourse on computer art. In general, the traditional artists felt 
that computer art relied too much on the technoscience concepts 
and techniques. Rather than having recourse to the humanistic 
thematic and traditional craft, computer art received its techniques, 
terminology, and cultural stimulus from abstract science and the 
latest technoscience paradigms such as cybernetics, information 
theory, artificial intelligence, science of complexity, artificial life, 
and others. Deeply indebted to the ideologies and working rationale 
of the abstract sciences, computer art always manifested the cult 
of science and technology. Coupled with this, the art community 
typically believed that the often hysterical enthusiasm within 
computer art’s futurological idiom was facile and did not suit the 
rigors of high art and criticism.
Beyond the recourse to technoscience, computer art consistently 
situated itself in opposition to art. From the celebratory bravado 
of Noll’s Mondrian Experiment to Franke’s belief in art’s 
demystification, the computer was championed as either a usurper 
of the artist or the ultimate abstractor and codifier of art and its 
mythical tradition. While rationalization and dematerialization 
occurred in contemporary art, the mechanistic tenor and extreme 
reduction of art to mathematical principles was objectionable to the 
mainstream art community. Art could be simple, but not reducible. 
Even for the most devoted abstractionists, computer art was one 
step too far in the depersonalization of art. Part of this reaction 
was from the humanists who felt that the human-as-machine 
metaphor, implicit in computer art, was disquieting. Humanism, 
especially the romantic strain, drove the criticism of computer art 
from the beginning. Judgments of blandness, exhaustive order, and 
impenetrable coolness, touted as aesthetic evaluations, were more 
about the art-making machine than the art itself. Computer art 
never freed itself of this criticism.
In addition, criticisms from the mainstream art world can be 
traced to the perceptions of the computer within the intellectual 
community. While in the 1960s computer art had endured the anti-
computer sentiment of humanists, the ensuing age of radicalism 
targeted the computer as a symbol of instrumental control. The 
anti-humanists attacked the computer, with its abstract detachment 
and rationalist foundations, as the Enlightenment instrument par 
EPILOGUE 259
excellence . As a child of the military-industrial complex and Cold 
War imperatives, the computer became a symbol of systemized 
control. As a result, anti-humanism joined forces with humanism to 
impact negatively upon computer art.
Much of the 1970s pessimism and technophobia inherent in 
anti-humanism became part of postmodernist dogma in the late 
1970s and early 1980s. In the late 1980s, postmodernism finally 
infiltrated computer art discourse in an attempt to introduce a 
measure of critical rigor. While many critics began championing 
the postmodern ethos in new, especially technology-oriented areas 
of the visual arts, postmodernism’s relationship to computer art 
was exceedingly problematic. From its conception, computer art 
exalted modernism’s main principles, including the inclination 
to historicize, the affirmation of abstraction and formalism, the 
language of futurology, and the will for aesthetic criterions. A 
major contradiction the postmodernists needed to overcome was 
that computer art had from the beginning supported rather than 
undermined modernist assumptions. Immediately, postmodern 
critics identified the old history of computer art as a throwback to 
formalism and purism and attacked computer art for being ostensibly 
apolitical. At first championed as a humanizer of technology in the 
modernist mode, computer art, once it came under the influence of 
postmodern critical discourse, was imagined as a dynamic, open-
ended, and transparent process. Whereas the modernist art object 
was finite, the postmodern art object was characterized by flux, 
process, interactivity, multiplicity, improvization, and spontaneity. 
Computer art was immediately associated with avant-garde 
photography and video, which had been viewed as the postmodern 
media par excellence . This way the postmodernists reconciled 
postmodern anti-technology doctrine by emphasizing the computer 
as a democratizing agent and disrupter of modernist convention.
While postmodernism was a destabilizing factor within the 
computer art discourse, advances and convergence in digital 
technology compounded the problem. Since the 1970s, the 
normative paradigm of artist-programmer had emerged to 
displace the scientists and technologists from the position of chief 
practitioners. Signaling the early modernist abstract movements as 
their antecedents, these artists had strong modernist convictions. 
They also expressed a profound devotion to the computer and its 
potential. With the advent, in the 1980s, of commercial software 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 260
and user-friendly interface, a new generation of artists emerged that 
had little need or will to understand the underlying structure and 
disconcerting complexities of the computer. Rapidly, artists could 
engage the computer on a haptic and tactile level rather than on a 
cerebral and abstract level.
In 1989, as a result of the relentless pressure from humanist 
art critics, the anti-technology sentiment from the anti-humanists, 
the general anti-computer sentiment from some sections of 
society, the internal division resulting from the introduction of 
user-friendly interface, and the politicization of technology by the 
postmodernists, computer art plunged into a crisis. Besieged by a 
number of opposing ideologies, computer art eventually fractured 
into an array of different appellations and, as time passed, the 
computer art project became outmoded.
While the external forces and the internal divisions have been 
well documented, there were a number of other problems that 
impeded computer art’s success. The difficulty for those devoted 
to computer art was that they sought acceptance or recognition 
through a modernist framework. As Lambert suggested, “The need 
to satisfy the various criteria of art, and the need to continually check 
to see if the art world’s dictates are being fulfilled, has somewhat 
imprisoned ‘computer art’.”35 The criterion for success was computer 
art’s acceptance into the canon. Its claims for acceptance into the 
prestigious pantheons of the art world were, however, misguided 
and impracticable at best. Computer art’s apologists accused art 
critics of being myopic and wholly uninterested in digital culture. 
For Franke, the critics lacked the ability or foresight to judge the new 
art form critically because they were simply unable to incorporate 
the new technoscience theories that nourished the art form.36 This 
is true, as mainstream critics on the whole did not have a sufficient 
desire to investigate the new theories that would reveal the worth 
of this new medium. It is difficult, however, to burden the overtaxed 
critic with the responsibility for the fate of computer art, as the 
complexities of the computer were often bewildering. It is hard to 
imagine how foreign the computer must have seemed to a critic 
with traditional classical training. It was far easier to surrender to 
the anti-computer sentiment, which was shared by most in the art 
world, quickly and cleanly dismissing computer art. Consequently, 
much of the criticism from the likes of Canaday was superficial, 
condescending, and at times mocking.
EPILOGUE 261
In the call for art world endorsement, there was an innate 
disavowal of computer art’s real strengths. While computer art 
had always remained on the margins of Art and Technology and 
the outermost fringes of contemporary art, it was central to many 
technoscience discourses. Computer art gained substantial support 
and held an important position in computer science, especially in 
computer graphics, which shares much of computer art’s heritage. 
While computer art’s exponents complained of being elided or 
occluded from art-based institutional support, they received support 
for exhibitions from IBM, Calcomp, Microsoft, Boeing, Bell Labs, 
U.S. Air Force Laboratories, and many other government and 
corporate bodies. Commentators often forget that computer art’s 
genesis was in the major research facilities, and as a discourse it was 
embedded in the burgeoning computer graphics industry. Through 
this support, computer art had its own infrastructure, conferences, 
awards, and publications. A remarkable amount of written material 
from outside the art world was devoted to computer art, rivaling 
and often exceeding mainstream movements.
Paradoxically, the computer, the very object that resulted in 
computer art’s exclusion from the art world, is the reason for 
computer art’s relative success and longevity. Although computer 
artists bemoaned their lack of acceptance, they did attract theorists 
to their work because of the computer’s importance as a symbolic 
and experimental technology. Another example of the computer’s 
allure is in the curating of Cybernetic Serendipity . While it was 
intended to explore the relationship between technology and 
creativity without any necessary recourse to computers, computer-
based art was included for both publicity and fund-raising purposes. 
The popularity of the computer was also computer art’s popularity.
Ironically, the computer as an evolving technology also added to 
computer art’s struggle with its own discontinuities. In modernist 
terms, it was impossible for computer artists to form a unified 
movement with the rapidly evolving nature of computer technology. 
Some believed that rapid technological development had prevented 
the computer medium from maturing. It is apparent that computer 
artists often struggled against the ceaseless momentum of digital 
technology, and its protean and many faceted nature meant 
that it would not submit easily to modernist or postmodernist 
understandings. Theoretical and practical engagement required a 
malleable and dynamic approach. With the way computer technology 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 262
expanded the sensorial experience, the traditional modality of the 
static picture became increasingly démodé . Moreover, because 
computing always worked toward imaging processing and software 
development, it was difficult for the purists to argue for computer 
art’s essential characteristics. The insistence on the artist to write his 
or her program was incompatible with the direction of computing.
The technological landscape through the 1990s changed 
dramatically. The computer, through its falling price, had become a 
major household appliance and source of entertainment, information, 
and communication. The Internet and other telecommunication 
networks became increasingly embedded in the fabric of modern 
society. The computer had departed considerably from its scientific 
and militaristic beginnings. Effectively, the computer, with its 
interactivity and multimedia, diverged from its Cold War context 
and became reoriented as a democratic, open, and potentially 
revolutionary technology. The democratization of the Internet and 
the birth of the World Wide Web confirmed this shift. While the 
traditional artist-programmers complained about their exclusion 
from traditional exhibition space, the advent of the Web provided a 
new habitat for computer art. In fact, computer artists, who had the 
necessary programming skills, were the first artists to build Web sites 
to showcase their work, something that is almost universal today. In 
the mid-1990s, the Web became crucial to the diffusion and 
popularization of digital arts. While many art critics saw fractal art 
as a passing fad, it actually grew in popularity among the new 
technoculture emerging on the Web. Moreover, Web-based art 
became a genre in itself. In addition, the Web provided an online 
resource for artists, educators, and the public. SIGGRAPH, New 
York Digital Salon, and other major digital art festivals began placing 
their exhibitions online. In 1994, the Fine Arts Forum became a 
major online forum that had information concerning events, 
competitions, conferences, and new sites about the field of art and 
technology. Other online organizations like Rhizome, started by 
Mark Tribe in 1996, became popular as a way of joining geographically 
dispersed artists, critics, and curators in a communications network 
that fostered experimentation with new media.
Since the mid-1980s, interest in the computer had spawned 
a growing technoculture, which proliferated a raft of unique 
magazines that combined technological utopianism, fetishism, 
EPILOGUE 263
and digital transcendentalism. A new cyberculture emerged that 
would bring about “cyberpunk” movements, influenced by William 
Gibson’s now canonical science fiction novel Neuromancer  (1984) 
and the “Extropians” who imagined future technological scenarios 
where the human body was redundant. Combined with postmodern 
critical discourse, the new technocultural manifestations moved 
technoscience paradigms such as cybernetics in new directions. 
With the advent of the Internet, the frontier mythology, already 
embedded in computer discourse, was further articulated through 
cyberspace, networking, and virtuality. From the early 1990s, 
cyberspace narratives dominated art and technology discourse, 
while virtual reality dominates the artistic and cultural imagination, 
culminating in Virtual Reality: An Emerging Medium , held at the 
Guggenheim Museum in 1993.
Cyberspace was understood through a number of historical and 
critical paradigms. Retaining many deconstructionist elements of 
postmodernism, commentators of virtuality implemented a variety 
of interdisciplinary modes into the composition of their theories. 
Postmodernism reenergized, transformed, and repoliticized the 
cultural understanding of technology. Donna Haraway, Sadie 
Plant, and others who theorized the new modalities of cyberspace 
evoked technology as a positive presence by formulating gender 
constructs and further disrupting the modernist subject. With its 
overwhelming self-confidence, postmodernism in the early-1990s 
transformed art and technology discourse. Under the influence of 
Lyotard and others, postmodernism meant a pluralistic attitude 
toward technology. Technology, and the computer in particular, 
shifted from a centralized power to individual personal computers 
that effectively bypassed central authority. Now technology was 
conceived as a radical challenge to the cultural and political status 
quo. The metaphor of distribution and empowerment through 
individual technological sites was strengthened with the Web. The 
Internet, frequently registered as a quintessentially postmodern 
phenomenon, was seen by many to have bypassed older power 
structures and created a proliferation of new social interactions, even 
though it was originally constructed as a communication system for 
the U.S. military. Increasingly, Gilles Deleuze’s biological metaphors 
of rhizomatic, nomadic structures and machine assemblages were 
applied to theorize these new technological trends. Consequently, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 264
the works of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari precipitated a more 
positive view of digital technology. Their concepts and vocabulary 
in particular have become, as Gere suggests, part of the discourse of 
digital culture and technoculture.37
In light of today’s ascendancy of social media, concepts such 
as virtuality and cyberspace even appear antiquated. Much has 
changed. The digital is everywhere and nowhere, internalized 
in every object we use, yet externalized in our social networks, 
connecting us with a seamlessness that defies its own technological 
history, so much so the criticism of computer art appears almost 
peculiar to new generations. Hébert, during a recent interview, 
reflected on the hostility that the general public, even the youth, 
showed toward computers in the 1970s. “Everybody was fearsome 
of those machines,” he said, “they did not want to be involved 
at any level with computers; they simply refused.” “But now,” he 
stated, “go into an Apple Store any given afternoon, and you’ll find 
hundreds of people, young and old, struggling to buy the latest 
digital technology.”38
If we evaluate computer art criticism in retrospect, we find that 
critics were quick to deliver judgment. There was no sophistication 
that marked good criticism, no dispassionate, independent point 
of view or will to bring new insight. Instead there existed a type of 
anti-computer dogmatism: the proverbial “all computer art is bad” 
response. Admittedly, some of the art was often rudimentary, but 
there was little recognition, even by exponents of the movement, 
of the incredible difficulty in making the computer into a visual 
medium. The blanket criticism of aesthetic ineptitude also blinded 
many critics to the complexity and subtlety of many of the 
designs. For example, Lloyd Sumner, who exhibited in Cybernetic 
Serendipity , is absent from all history of digital art because of his 
seemingly unsophisticated designs. Yet, if one examines his entire 
body of work from the late-1960s, one finds a complexity and 
subtlety that rivals the successful op artists and abstractionists of 
the day (for example, see Figures 3.2 and 3.3). Rather than singling 
out the most successful work for evaluation, as was common in 
the profession, critics went for the most unsuccessful and made it 
emblematic of the entire movement.
One of the reasons why supporters of computer art were 
continually frustrated was expectations were exceedingly high. 
Whether it was the futurology that continually forecasted an 
EPILOGUE 265
upward trajectory or the belief that validation was assured in a 
shifting art world, there was a false sense of inevitability. While 
computer art emerged in the age of “cool modes of painting and 
construction” where “process prevails,” to use Harold Rosenberg 
phrasing, it was wholly remote, acting on the absolute peripheries 
of art.39 Computer art emerged in a period, as Rosenberg suggested, 
where the art object “exists under constant threat of deformation 
and loss of identity.”40 For this modernist critic, there was constant 
expanding of art history to incorporate these “new species” of 
cultural production.41 Computer art could be described as one of 
those “anxious objects,” as Rosenberg called them—an art form 
that had pushed art in ways that undermined its once secure 
identity.42 Art’s nature, as the influential critic wrote, is “contingent 
upon recognition by the current communion of the knowing. Art 
does not exist. It declares itself .”43
Computer art was perhaps the most “anxious” of all objects of 
late twentieth-century art. The transition from scientific non-art to 
art, allowed in part because of art’s changing epistemology, was 
a slow and often tortuous process. As Rosenberg wrote in 1966, 
there was no “agreed-upon way of identifying works as art except 
by including them in art history.”44 For computer art, inclusion in 
the narrative of art history has only happened in the last decade, 
following recent scholarship and historical-themed exhibitions. 
Though computer art is rarely found in orthodox art survey books 
(instead it is commonly part of digital art histories), it is no longer 
questioned as an art object. Incredible as it seems, it has been over 
50 years since the first computer artworks were produced.
But even with the broad enculturation of digital technology and 
the final acceptance of computer art as a legitimate art object, early 
computer artists still experience resistance. Incongruously, American 
pioneers in the field of computing have gained much notoriety and 
success, even if we discount revolutionary figures like Bill Gates 
and Steve Jobs, yet the pioneers of computer art remain largely 
unknown, having no place in the history of American art. Ironically, 
the lonely artist charting the outer edge of the frontier, struggling 
to capture the mysteries of a vast and untamed landscape, is one 
of the most evocative parts of the American art narrative. Though 
this mythology is attached most readily to the nineteenth-century 
artists of the Hudson River School, it could also easily be applied to 
early computer artists. Like the early American landscape painters, 
WHEN  THE  MACHINE  MADE  ART 266
computer artists were the first to explore a new frontier—not the 
expanding Westward territories, but the emergent digital terrain 
made possible by the modern computer.
What is so important about computer art is that its history 
gives us a glimpse of the outer extremities of art as it expanded, 
diversified, and reconfigured in the late twentieth century. Computer 
art, it can be argued, was more peripheral than traditional forms 
of outsider art. Outsider art, or “art brut” as it is also referred, 
was first employed to describe art done by a few gifted nineteenth-
century asylum inmates, and then widened in the twentieth century 
to include naïve artists, so-called “primitives.” Lacking formal 
training and without proper links to artistic establishments, these 
artists were largely excluded from art history and its canon. But 
what was central to the interest in outsider art was the human 
impulse or the hidden genius that seemed to personify this type of 
artist. The audience was attracted to the unworldly artist because 
they embodied a sense of humanity that was often lacking in the 
spiritless modern world. Computer art, conversely, was seen as 
the epitome of soullessness, a cold cultural product produced by 
machines under the control of technologists rather than artists. 
Computer art appeared to mock all that was human.
The acrimony between artist and scientist that seemed to define the 
history of computer art conceals the achievements of collaboration. 
At no other time in the twentieth century have artists, scientists, and 
technologists come so close and achieved so much. The history of 
computer art is a history of interdisciplinary exploration, and this 
interdisciplinarity has emerged as a central tenet of contemporary 
new media art. Although it was hard for many artists to admit, 
many of the scientists and technologists were highly creative, taking 
digital image-making in a variety of imaginative directions. These 
individuals disrupted the prototypical model of the twentieth-
century scientist, becoming in the process a type of transgressive 
technologist. In addition, the artist-programmer that was to emerge 
following the era of technologists was just as important. The artist-
programmer was a totally unique conception of the artist and 
changed the archetype forever. Never before had the artist moved so 
far outside traditional forms of knowledge and skill to seek entire 
new systems of thinking and practice.
One of the greatest myths of the computer art—the belief that you 
merely “push a button” to produce art—still remains a sore point 
EPILOGUE 267
with artists. Reading the early accounts and interviewing pioneering 
computer artists gives some indication on how tremendously 
difficult it was. Showing incredible fortitude in the face of continual 
rejection, these self-taught and self-funded artists displayed dogged 
persistence with an intractable technology. Today the myth has 
largely disappeared. We tend to acknowledge that early digital 
technology was an exceedingly difficult frontier, especially when we 
look through the lens of today’s highly evolved digital technologies. 
In retrospect, it is also easy to see the legacy of the pioneers in 
higher education. Beyond the myriad of new media festivals that 
attract participants from around the world, the pioneers built the 
innovative interdisciplinary programs and research centers that 
dot the globe. The digital art landscape is largely shaped by these 
individuals.
The importance of computer art to the history of twentieth-
century art is also vital. Computer art was more than an aberrant 
art form that struggled with its own self-formulation. It reflects 
the paradoxes and irreconcilable differences of all art forms that 
operate in that uneasy ground between art and science. Its history 
also reveals the anxieties and preconceptions of art as it struggles 
against its own evolving nature, having to constantly redefine 
itself as digital technology metamorphosed. However, computer 
art should not rely on its historical impact alone, becoming a 
simple lens to examine shifting cultural dynamics. We need to look 
thoughtfully at the art itself, to reevaluate it with sophisticated and 
informed responses. Because the dogmatic criticism which judged 
computer art as unimportant has faded with history, we are now 
able to adequately evaluate the computer-generated artwork of 
those artists who have given a lifetime of practice and are now 
in the twilight of their careers. Within their back-catalogs, which 
are safely housed in their busy studios, remain some of their most 
important works, all ready to be collected by museums of private 
collections. Deep inside this rich oeuvre are the long-desired and 
elusive masterpieces of this unique yet misunderstood art form.
NOTES
Introduction
1 See, Holland Cotter, “Art in Review; Wade Guyton,” New York 
Times , December 14, 2007, E. 38; and Ken Johnson, “Art in Review; 
Wade Guyton and Kelley Walker” New York Times , March 18, 2005, 
E. 42.
2 For example, Bruce Wands, the Chair of the MFA Computer Art 
Department at the School of Visual Arts, believes those past graduates 
from the MFA program, a program started in the late-1980s when the 
term “computer art” was still in vogue, would be angered by a name 
change. Although Wands and others entertained the idea of changing 
the name, the term’s historic value proved too strong and because 
computer art was rarely employed after 1990, it was effective in 
differentiating the SVA’s educational offerings from the others.
3 Dominic McIver Lopes, A Philosophy of Computer Art  (London: 
Routledge, 2010), 2.
4 Peter Weibel, “Digital Art: Intrusion or Inclusion?,” in A Little-
known Story about a Movement, a Magazine, and the Computer’s 
Arrival in Art: New Tendencies and Bit International, 1961–1973 , ed. 
Margit Rosen (Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 2011), 43.
5 Douglas Kahn, “Between a Bach and a Bard Place: Productive 
Constraint in Early Computer Arts,” in Media Art Histories , ed. 
Oliver Grau (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2007), 423.
6 Lejaren A. Hiller Jr., “Computer Music,” in Cybernetic Serendipity: 
The Computer and the Arts , ed. Jasia Reichardt (New York: Praeger, 
1969), 21.
7 Joel Chadade, e-mail message to author, May 12, 2008.
8 Elliott Schwartz, Electronic Music: A Listener’s Guide  (New York: 
Praeger, 1973), 87.
9 See, C. T. Funkhouser, Prehistoric Digital Poetry: An Archaeology of 
Forms, 1959–1995  (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2007), 
28.
NOTES 269
10 C. T. Funkhouser, Prehistoric Digital ., 81. For an example of this 
sentiment in computer-generated music, see Hiller, “Computer 
Music,” in Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts , 
21–25.
11 John Morris, “How to Write Poems with a Computer,” Michigan 
Quarterly Review  6, no.1 (Winter 1967): 20.
12 Jeanne Beaman, telephone correspondence with the author, May 6, 
2008.
13 Jeanne Beaman and P. LeVasseur, “Computer Dances,” an essay/
presentation accompanying performance exhibitions in the early 
1960s. The original typed and annotated text is held in the author’s 
archive.
14 John Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” New York Times , 
August 30, 1970, 87.
15 Delle Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” in Computers in Art and 
Design , ed. Isaac V. Kerlow (Las Vegas: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1991), 
94.
16 Robert E. Mueller, “Idols of Computer Art,” Art in America  (May/
June 1972): 68.
17 Mueller, “Idols of Computer Art,” 72.
18 Phillip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, Descartes ’ Dream: The World 
According to Mathematics  (Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1986), 
48.
19 Paul Brown, “New Media: An Emergent Paradigm,” Periphery  29 
(November 1996): 13.
20 Grace Hertlein, telephone correspondence with author, December 12, 
2011.
21 Mihai Nadin, “The Aesthetic Challenge of the Impossible,” in Images 
Digital: Computer Artists in Germany 1986 , ed. Alex and Barbara 
Kempkens (Munich: Barke Verlag, 1986), 19.
22 Michael Rush, New Media in the Late 20th Century Art  (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1999), 172.
23 Kahn, “Between a Bach and a Bard Place,” 424.
24 Margit Rosen, “Editorial,” A Little-known Story about a Movement, 
a Magazine, and the Computer ’s Arrival in Art: New Tendencies and 
Bit International, 1961–1973 , ed. Margit Rosen (Cambridge MA: 
The MIT Press, 2011), 10.
25 See, White Heat Cold Logic: British Computer Art 1960–1980 , 
ed. Paul Brown, Charlie Gere, Nicholas Lambert, and Catherine 
NOTES 270
Mason (Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 2009), A Little-known 
Story about a Movement, a Magazine, and the Computer ’s Arrival in 
Art: New Tendencies and Bit International, 1961–1973 , ed. Margit 
Rosen (Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 2011) and Mainframe 
Experimentalism: Early Computing and the Foundations of the 
Digital Arts , ed. Hannah Higgins and Douglas Kahn (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2012).
26 Edward Shanken, “Historicizing Art and Technology: Forging a 
Method and Firing a Canon,” in Media Art Histories , ed. Oliver 
Grau (Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 2007), 44.
27 Charlie Gere, Introduction to White Heat Cold Logic , 1.
28 Bruce Wands, Art of the Digital Age  (New York: Thames & Hudson, 
2006), 8.
29 Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 7.
30 Dieter Daniels, “Art and Media,” in The Age of Modernism: Art in 
the 20th Century , ed. C. M. Joachimides and N. Rosenthal (New 
York: DAP Publishers, 1997), 564.
31 Mark Wilson, Drawing with Computers: The Artist ’s Guide to 
Computer Graphics  (New York: Perigee Books, 1985), 13.
32 See endnote 24 for a list of examples.
33 Richard Wright, “The Image in Art and ‘Computer Art,’” Leonardo,  
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 49.
34 For example, the animation work of Lillian Schwartz and Charles 
Csuri was shown and collected by the Museum of Modern Art.
35 Gustav Metzger, “Untitled,” in A Little-known Story about a 
Movement, a Magazine, and the Computer ’s Arrival in Art: New 
Tendencies and Bit International, 1961–1973 , ed. Margit Rosen 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011), 422. Originally published in 
Bit International 7 , ed. Boris Kelemen and Radoslav Putar, Galerije 
Grada Zagreba, Zagreb, 1971, 26–33.
36 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgement , trans. J. C. Meredith 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952), 168.
37 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 57. Quote appears in 
table, 28.
38 Max Bense, Aesthetica: Einführung in die Neue Aesthetik  (Baden-
Baden: Agis-Verlag, 1965).
39 Jack Burnham, “The Aesthetics of Intelligent Systems,” in On the 
Future of Art , ed. Arnold Toynbee (New York: Viking Press, 1970), 
122.
NOTES 271
Chapter one
1 Arnold Rockman and Leslie Mezei, “The Electronic Computer as an 
Artist,” Canadian Art  11 (1964): 365.
2 Although the pioneers of computer art refer to themselves as 
scientists or mathematicians, it is more apt to categorize them as 
technologists, because most of their research revolved around the 
development and advancement of digital systems and technologies. 
These ranged from developing weapons and industrial computer 
systems to business information and graphic processing systems. For 
those who called themselves mathematicians, it is fair to say that they 
were applied mathematicians such as mathematical engineers.
3 Rockman and Mezei, “The Electronic Computer as an Artist,” 367.
4 Jonathan Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today  (New York: 
Praeger Publishers, 1972), 84.
5 Leslie Mezei, “Artistic Design by Computer,” Computers and 
Automation  13, no. 8 (August 1964): 12–15.
6 Rockman and Mezei, “The Electronic Computer as an Artist,” 365.
7 Stuart Preston, “Art Ex Machina,” New York Times , April 18, 1965, 
X23.
8 John R. Pierce, “Portrait of the Machine as a Young Artist,” Playboy  
12, no. 6, June 1965, 124.
9 Frieder Nake, “Personal Recollections of a Distant Beginning,” in 
Explorations in Art and Technology , ed. Linda Candy and Ernest 
Edmonds (London: Springer Verlag, 2002), 7.
10 Nake, “Personal Recollections of a Distant Beginning.”
11 A. Michael Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United 
States: A Memoir,” Leonardo  27, no. 1 (1991), 41.
12 A. Michael Noll, “Patterns by 7090,” Bell Telephone Laboratories, 
Incorporated, Technical Memorandum , August 28, 1962.
13 Noll, “Patterns by 7090.”
14 Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States,” 41.
15 Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States.”
16 Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States.”
17 Preston, “Art Ex Machina,” X23.
18 Cynthia Goodman, Digital Visions: Computers and Art  (New York: 
Harry N. Abrams, 1987), 25.
19 Preston, “Art Ex Machina,” X23.
NOTES 272
20 “Computer-Generated Pictures,” Time , April 23, 1965, NY, 6.
21 “Computer-Generated Pictures,” New York Herald Tribune , April 10, 
1965, 8.
22 Goodman, Digital Visions , 25.
23 Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States,” 41.
24 Noll, “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States.”
25 Nake, “Personal Recollections,” 6.
26 Haruki Tsuchiya, “The Philosophy of Computer Art,” Computers 
and Automation  (September 1969): 18.
27 Goodman, Digital Visions , 18.
28 Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971).
29 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
30 Robert E. Mueller, The Science of Art: The Cybernetics of Creative 
Communication  (London: Rapp & Whiting, 1967), 276.
31 Andrew Jamison and Ron Eyerman, Seeds of the Sixties  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1994), 21.
32 Lewis Mumford, Art & Technics  (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1952), 8.
33 Mumford, Art & Technics , 6.
34 Mumford, Art & Technics , 6.
35 Philip Marchand, Marshall McLuhan: The Medium and the 
Messenger  (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1998), 77.
36 Marchand, Marshall McLuhan , 116.
37 Herbert Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man  (Boston: Beacon Press, 
1964).
38 Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society , trans. J. Wilkinson (New 
York: Vintage, 1964), 61.
39 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media  (New York: McGraw Hill, 
1964), 46.
40 Jack Burnham, “Art and Technology: The Panacea that Failed,” in 
The Myths of Information: Technology and Postindustrial Culture , 
ed. K. Woodward (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980), 207.
41 Frieder Nake, “There Should Be No Computer Art,” PAGE: 
Computer Art Society Bulletin  18 (October 1971): 18–19.
42 C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959).
NOTES 273
43 Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution , 11.
44 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
45 György Kepes, “The Visual Arts and the Sciences: A Proposal for 
Collaboration,” in Science and Culture , ed. G. Holton (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1965), 146.
46 Douglas Davis, Art and the Future: A History/Prophecy of the 
Collaboration between Science, Technology and Art  (London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1973), 35.
47 Kepes, “The Visual Arts and the Sciences,” 149.
48 Kepes, “The Visual Arts and the Sciences,” 151.
49 See “Introduction”, Picturing Science Producing Art , ed. Caroline 
Jones and Peter Galison (London: Routledge, 1998).
50 Charles Davy, Towards a Third Culture  (London: Faber and Faber, 
1961); John Brockman, The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific 
Revolution  (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995); Elinor S. Shaffer, 
ed., The Third Culture: Literature and Science , European Cultures  
(Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 1998).
51 For examples, see Francesco d’ Arcais, “Evolution of the Influences 
between Science and Art,” Impact of Science on Society  24, no. 1 
(1974): 31–40; and Aharon Katzir-Katchalsky, “Reflections on Art 
and Science,” Leonardo  5, no. 3 (1972): 249–253.
52 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
53 Davis, Art and the Future , 59.
54 Lea Vergine, Art on the Cutting Edge: A Guide to Contemporary 
Movements  (Milan, Italy: Skira, 1996), 88.
55 Davis, Art and the Future , 58.
56 Davis, Art and the Future .
57 Vergine, Art on the Cutting Edge , 92.
58 Vergine, Art on the Cutting Edge , 93.
59 Davis, Art and the Future , 73.
60 Davis, Art and the Future , 52.
61 Jack Burnham, Beyond Modern Sculpture: The Effects of Science and 
Technology on the Sculpture of This Century  (New York: G. Braziller, 
1968).
62 Katherine Hoffman, Explorations: The Visual Arts Since 1945  (New 
York: HarperCollins, 1991), 192.
63 Edward Shanken, “Gemini Rising, Moon in Apollo: Attitudes on the 
Relationship between Art and Technology in the U.S., 1966–71,” 
NOTES 274
Leonardo Electronic Almanac  6, no. 12 (1999), accessed July 19, 
2013. http://mitpress.mit.edu/e-journals/LEA/ARTICLES/gemini.
html.
64 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 71.
65 See, Frank Popper, Art of the Electronic Age  (London: Thames and 
Hudson Ltd., 1993), 28; Christine Tamblyn, “Computer Art as 
conceptual art,” Art Journal  49, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 253–256.
66 Henry Flynt’s seminal paper was written in 1961 and published 
in 1963. Henry Flynt, “Essay: Concept Art,” in An Anthology , ed. 
LaMonte Young and Jackson Mac Low (New York: H. Friedrich, 
1963). In the August edition of Computers and Automation , Edmund 
Berkeley announced the start of the “Computer Art Contest.” See 
Edmund C. Berkeley, “The Computer and Art,” Computers and 
Automation  (August 1963): 3.
67 Sol LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art,” Art Forum  5, no. 10 
(1967): 80.
68 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art.”
69 Interview with Sol LeWitt June 12, 1969, in Robert Barry, Alberro 
Alexander, and Patricia Norvell, ed., Recording conceptual art  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 114.
70 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art,” 79.
71 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art.”
72 Donald B. Kuspit, “Sol LeWitt: The Look of Thought,” Art in 
America  September/October (1975): 43–49; see also Marion Keiner, 
Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai Nadin, “Manfred Mohr’s Abstract 
Aesthetic,” in Manfred Mohr  (Zurich: Waser Verlag, 1994), 140.
73 Sol LeWitt , exhibition catalog (New York: The Museum of  
Modern Art, 1978), 53, cited in Anne Rorimer, New Art in the  
60s and 70s Redefining Reality  (New York: Thames & Hudson, 
2004), 22.
74 Don Denny, “Geometric Art and Romantic Vision,” Aesthetics and 
Art Criticism  29, no. 2 (1970): 175.
75 Denny, “Geometric Art and Romantic Vision.”
76 Denny, “Geometric Art and Romantic Vision.”
77 Davis, Art and the Future , 172.
78 Rosalind Krauss, The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other 
Modernist Myths  (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1985), 157.
79 Edward Shanken, “Art in the Information Age: Technology and 
conceptual art,” Leonardo  35, no. 4 (2002): 433.
NOTES 275
80 Jasia Reichardt, “Computer Art,” in Cybernetic Serendipity: The 
Computer and Art , ed. Jasia Reichardt (New York: Praeger, 1968), 
71.
81 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art,” 80.
82 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art.”
83 Sol LeWitt, “Sentences on conceptual art,” Art-Language  1, no. 1 
(May 1969): 11.
84 LeWitt, “Paragraphs on conceptual art,” 80.
85 Irene Taviss, ed., The Computer Impact  (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 
1970), 5.
86 Theodore Roszak, The Cult of Information: The Folklore of 
Computers and the True Art of Thinking  (New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1986), 8.
87 Jeffery Young, Forbes: Greatest Technological Stories  (New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998), 31.
88 R. S. Lee, “The Computer’s Public Image,” in The Computer Impact , 
ed. Irene Taviss (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1970), 273.
89 Taviss, The Computer Impact , 3.
90 Taviss, The Computer Impact , 200.
91 Taviss, The Computer Impact , 4.
92 In 1968, the Scottish chess champion David Levy made a public bet 
with leading members of the artificial intelligence community that 
he would be able to overcome any chess-playing computer program 
developed over the next decade. Levy won the contest, easily 
overcoming a succession of more advanced computer programs.
93 Frederic G. Withington, The Real Computer: Its Influence, Uses, and 
Effects  (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1969), 
222.
94 For examples, see Clifton Fabiman, The Mathematical Magpie  
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962); Clifton Fabiman, ed., 
Fantasia Mathematica  (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1958); Fritz 
Leiber, The Silver Eggheads  (New York: Ballantine Books, 1961).
95 Dennis Gabor, “The Inaugural Address,” Imperial College, London, 
1958, published in part as “Technological Civilization and Man’s 
Future,” in Cybernetics, Art and Ideas , ed. Jasia Reichardt (London: 
Studio Vista, 1971), 18.
96 Rhys Carpenter, “The Basis Artistic Creation in the Fine Arts,” in The 
Bases of Artistic Creation , ed. Maxwell Anderson, Rhys Carpenter, 
and Roy Harris (New York: Octagon Books, 1969), 30.
NOTES 276
97 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgement , trans. J. C. Meredith 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952), 168.
98 Preston, “Art Ex Machina,” X23.
99 A. Michael Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 
IEEE Spectrum  4, no. 10 (1967): 90.
100 Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium.”
101 Reichardt, “Computer Art,” Cybernetic Serendipity , 70.
102 John Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” New York 
Times , August 30, 1970, 87.
103 Taylor, Grant D. “Routing Mondrian: The A. Michael Noll 
Experiment.” Media-N . 8, no. 2 (Fall 2012): 11–17.
104 Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 93.
105 Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 92.
106 A. Michael Noll, “Human or Machine: A Subjective Comparison  
of Piet Mondrian’s ‘Composition with Lines’ (1917) and a 
Computer-Generated Picture.” The Psychological Record  16  
(1966): 1–10.
107 Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 92.
108 Noll, “Human or Machine,” 8–9.
109 Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 92.
110 Meyer Schapiro, Modern Art: 19th & 20th Centuries, Selected 
Papers  (New York: Braziller, 1978), 252–254.
111 Noll, “Human or Machine,” 9.
112 Noll, “Human or Machine.”
113 Noll, “Human or Machine.”
114 Noll, “Human or Machine.”
115 Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution , 16.
116 György Kepes, ed., The New Landscape in Art and Science  
(Chicago: Paul Theobald and Co, 1956), 22.
117 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 59.
Chapter two
1 György Kepes, “The New Landscape,” in The New Landscape in Art 
and Science , ed. György Kepes (Chicago: Paul Theobald and Co., 
1956).
NOTES 277
2 James Elkins, “Art History and Images that Are Not Art,” The Art 
Bulletin  77, no. 4 (1995): 555.
3 Franz Roh, Photo-Eye  (London: Thames and Hudson, 1974), 14.
4 Roh, Photo-Eye , 15.
5 Ben Laposky, “Oscillons: Electronic Abstractions,” Leonardo  2, no. 4 
(October 1969): 345
6 In 1959, the introduction of a Calcomp digital plotter, a computer-
driven mechanical drawing machine, made possible the display 
of linear configurations. Prior to this, the only way to record the 
digital image was via analog photographic methods. In the 1960s, 
the digital plotter became one of the fastest growing industries 
within computing. Calcomp dominated the world plotter market so 
completely that virtually all computer art produced before 1970 was 
printed on one of the company’s plotters.
7 John Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” New York Times , 
August 30, 1970, 87.
8 Manfred Mohr, Artist ’s Statement 2000 , in The Rave Webmuseum’s 
Spotlight Gallery, Manfred Mohr Retrospective Exhibition, accessed 
July 15, 2013, http://www.emohr.com/ww2_out.html .
9 Laposky, “Oscillons: Electronic Abstractions,” 352.
10 Laposky, “Oscillons,” 353.
11 Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, The Mathematical Experience  
(Boston: Birkhauser, 1980), 318.
12 Roman Verostko, “Algorithmic Art: Composing the Score for Visual 
Art,” accessed July 20, 2013, http://www.verostko.com/algorithm.
html.
13 Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 58.
14 Frank Dietrich, “Visual Intelligence: The First Decade of Computer 
Art (1965–1975),” Leonardo  19, no. 2 (1986): 161.
15 Nicholas Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003), 
accessed July 20, 2013, http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/ .
16 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 119.
17 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 58.
18 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 119.
19 A. Michael Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 
IEEE Spectrum  4, no. 10 (1967): 89.
NOTES 278
20 Franke, Computer Graphics , 106.
21 Joseph Schillinger, The Mathematical Basis of the Arts  (New York: 
Da Capo Press, 1948), 673.
22 Hiroshi Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?” in Artist and Computer , 
ed. Ruth Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 113.
23 Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?”
24 Herbert W. Franke, “Computers and Visual Art,” Leonardo  4, no. 4 
(1971): 331.
25 Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?,” 112.
26 Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?”
27 Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?”
28 Robert E. Mueller, The Science of Art: The Cybernetics of Creative 
Communication  (London: Rapp & Whiting, 1967), 321.
29 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine  (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1948).
30 Jack Burnham, “Real Time Systems,” Artforum  8, no. 1 (September 
1969): 49–55.
31 Robert C. Morgan, Art into Ideas: Essays on conceptual art  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 6.
32 Robert Mallary, “Computer Sculpture: Six Levels of Cybernetics,” 
Art Forum  7 (May 1969): 29–35.
33 See, Jasia Reichardt, ed., Cybernetics, Art and Ideas  (London: Studio 
Vista, 1971).
34 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 7.
35 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art .
36 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
37 Quoted in Douglas Davis, Art and the Future: A History/Prophecy 
of the Collaboration between Science, Technology and Art  (London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1973), 135.
38 Leslie Mezei, “Artistic Design by Computer,” Computers and 
Automation  13, no. 8 (1964): 12–15.
39 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 113.
40 Robert Mallary, “Robert Mallary,” in Artist and Computer , ed. R. 
Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 6.
41 See, Max Bense, “The Project of Generative Aesthetics,” in 
Cybernetics, Art and Ideas , ed. Jasia Reichardt (London: Studio 
Vista, 1971), 57; originally in Max Bense, Aesthetica: Einführung in 
die Neue Aesthetik  (Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag. 1965).
NOTES 279
42 Frieder Nake, “There Should be No Computer Art,” PAGE: 
Computer Art Society Bulletin  18 (October 1971): 18–19.
43 See, Frieder Nake, Ästhetik als Informationsverarbeitung  (Wien, New 
York: Springer-Verlag), 1974.
44 Umberto Eco, Arte Programmata: arte cinetica, opera moltiplicate, 
opera aperta , exhibition catalogue (Milan: Galleria Vittorio 
Emanuele, 1962).
45 Haruki Tsuchiya, “The Philosophy of Computer Art,” Computers 
and Automation  (September 1969): 18.
46 Tsuchiya, “The Philosophy of Computer Art.”
47 John R. Pierce, “Portrait of the Machine as a Young Artist,” Playboy  
12, no. 6, June 1965, 182.
48 See chapter “Mondrian: Order and Randomness in Abstract 
Painting,” in Modern Art: 19th & 20th Centuries: Selected Papers , ed. 
Meyer Schapiro (New York: George Braziller, 1978).
49 A. Michael Noll, “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium,” 
IEEE Spectrum  4, no. 10 (1967): 93.
50 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 27.
51 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art .
52 Arthur Efland, “An Interview with Charles Csuri,” in Cybernetic 
Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts , ed. Jasia Reichardt (New 
York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1968), 82.
53 Georg Nees, “Programming Stochastic Computer Graphics,” in 
Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and Art , ed. Jasia Reichardt 
(New York: Praeger, 1968), 79.
54 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 119.
55 Leon Harmon and Kenneth Knowlton, “Picture Processing by 
Computer,” Science  163 (April 1969): 20.
56 Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” 87.
57 Jasia Reichardt, The Computer in Art  (London: Studio Vista, 1971), 81.
58 Reichardt, The Computer in Art .
59 Reichardt, The Computer in Art .
60 Haruki Tsuchiya et al., “Computer Technique Group from Japan,” 
in Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts , ed. Jasia 
Reichardt (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1968), 75.
61 Tsuchiya, “The Philosophy of Computer Art,” 18.
62 Tsuchiya, “The Philosophy of Computer Art.”
63 Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” 87.
NOTES 280
Chapter three
1 Colette Bangert and Charles Jeffery Bangert, “Computer Grass Is 
Natural Grass,” in Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth Leavitt (New York: 
Harmony Books, 1976), 20.
2 Ruth Leavitt, in her preface, Artist and Computer  (New York: 
Harmony Books, 1976), vii.
3 Bob Draper, “Computer Art,” New Scientist  (December1974): 830.
4 Leavitt, Artist and Computer , vii.
5 Robert E. Mueller, “The Leonardo Paradox: Imagining the Ultimate 
Creative Computer,” Leonardo  23, no. 4 (1990): 427–430.
6 Douglas Davis, Art and the Future: A History/Prophecy of the 
Collaboration between Science, Technology and Art  (London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1973), 77.
7 Edward Shanken, “Art in the Information Age: Technology and 
conceptual art,” Leonardo  35, no. 4 (2002): 435.
8 Davis, Art and the Future , 77.
9 Jack Burnham, “Art and Technology: The Panacea that Failed,” 
in Myths of Information: Technology and Postindustrial Culture , 
ed. Kathleen Woodward (Madison, WI: Coda Press, 1980). 210. 
See original quote, Max Kozloff, “The Multimillion Dollar Art 
Boondoggle,” Artforum  (October 1971): 72.
10 Burnham, “Art and Technology,” 211.
11 John Cohen, “Creativity, Technology and the Arts,” in Cybernetics, 
Art and Ideas , ed. Jasia Reichardt (London: Studio Vista, 1971), 
26.
12 Burnham, “Art and Technology,” 210.
13 Walter W. Finke, “Information: Dilemma If Deliverance,” Computers 
and Automation  15 (August 1966): 22.
14 Finke, “Information,” 23.
15 Finke, “Information.”
16 Finke, “Information.”
17 Robert Preusser, “Revitalizing Art and Humanizing Technology: 
An Educational Challenge,” Impact of Science on Society  24, no. 1 
(1974): 58.
18 Preusser, “Revitalizing Art and Humanizing Technology.”
19 Frank J. Malina, “Comments on Visual Fine Art Produced by Digital 
Computers,” Leonardo  4, no. 3 (1971): 264
NOTES 281
20 Jonathan Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today  (New York: 
Praeger Publishers, 1972), 11.
21 Davis, Art and the Future , 77.
22 See, Jasia Reichardt, The Computer in Art  (London: Studio Vista 
Limited, 1971), 96.
23 Leslie Mezei, “Leslie Mezei,” in Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth 
Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976).
24 Kenneth Knowlton, “Computer Art: Hardware and Software 
vs. Aesthetics,” (Proceedings of the Seventh National Sculpture 
Conference, coordinators Colette and Charles Jeffery Bangert, 
University of Kansas Press, April, 1972), 184.
25 Knowlton, “Computer Art.”
26 Kenneth Knowlton, “Computer Graphics Pioneers: On Frustrations 
of Collaborating with Artists,” Computer Graphics  35, no. 3 (August 
2001): 22–24.
27 Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today , 11.
28 Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 122.
29 Quoted in Hebert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 119.
30 William Spence Jarnagin, “The Colourful World of Cybernetic Art,” 
Science Journal  (September 1969): 35.
31 Frieder Nake, “Personal Recollections of a Distant Beginning by 
Frieder Nake,” in Explorations in Art and Technology , ed. Linda 
Candy and Ernest Edmonds (London: Springer, 2002).
32 Grace Hertlein, “Computer Art: The Search beyond Manipulation,” 
Computers and Automation  22 (November 1973): 18.
33 Frank Malina, “Aims and Scope of Leonardo,” Leonardo  1 (1968): 1.
34 Malina, “Aims and Scope of Leonardo.”
35 David Carrier, “The Arts and Science and Technology: Problems and 
Prospects,” Leonardo  21, no. 4 (1988): 341–342.
36 Pamela Grant-Ryan, “Why Leonardo? Past, Present and Future,” 
Leonardo  20, no. 4 (1987): 398.
37 Jasia Reichardt, ed., Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and Art  
(New York: Praeger, 1968), 71.
38 Frank Dietrich, “Visual Intelligence: The First Decade of Computer 
Art (1965–1975),” Leonardo  19, no. 2 (1986): 162.
39 Duane M. Palyka, “Computer Painting,” in Artist and Computer , ed. 
Ruth Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 62.
NOTES 282
40 Jasia Reichardt, “Twenty Years of Symbiosis between Art and 
Science,” Impact of Science on Society  24, no. 1 (1974): 48.
41 The journal was first published in 1951 with the title The Computing 
Machinery Field . In 1953 it changed to Computers & Automation  
and then to Computers and People  in 1974 when it began to publish 
material relating to the social effects of computers and information 
systems. For example, it tackled the ethical, social, and global issues 
of the rising digital culture.
42 Lillian Schwartz, “The Technology of Each Era,” Computers and 
People  (August–September 1978): 19.
43 Lloyd Sumner, Computer Art and Human Response  (Charlottesville, 
Virginia: Paul B. Victorius, 1968), 12.
44 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 120.
45 Herbert W. Franke, “Refractions of Science into Art,” in The Beauty 
of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems , ed. Heinz-Otto 
Peitgen and P. H. Richter (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1986), 181.
46 See Grace Hertlein, “Computer Art: Review, 1968; Survey, 1978; 
Predictions, 1988,” Computers and People  (August–September 1978): 
8–9; and also see, Reichardt, The Computer in Art  (London: Studio 
Vista Limited, 1971).
47 Charlie Gere, Digital Culture  (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), 114.
48 Gere, Digital Culture , 125.
49 Rebecca Allen, Eudice Feder, Darcy Gerberg, Cooper Giloth, Barbara 
Nessim, Sonia Landy Sheridan, Vibeke Sorensen, Joan Truckenbrod, 
Jane Veeder, Donna Cox, Diane Fenster, Sue Gollifer, Cynthia Rubin, 
Darcy Gerbarg, Nicole Stenger and many more.
50 Nathan Ensmenger, “Making Programming Masculine,” in Gender 
Codes: Why Women Are Leaving Computing , ed. Thomas J. Misa 
(Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley, 2010), 116.
51 For a more detailed account, see Grant D. Taylor, “Up for Grabs: 
Agency, Praxis, and the Politics of Early Digital Art,” in Lateral , ed. 
Katherine Behar and Silvia Ruzanka (Spring 2013), accessed July 
20, 2013, http://lateral.culturalstudiesassociation.org/issue2/theory/
taylor/index.html .
52 Cynthia B. Rubin, e-mail message to author, May 25, 2004.
53 In Digital Culture , Gere mentions Ursula K. LeGuin, Anne 
McCaffrey, Joanna Russ, Kate Wilhelm, C.J. Cherryh, and Joan 
Vinge.
54 Anne M. Spalter, The Computer in the Visual Arts  (Reading,  
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1999), 11.
NOTES 283
55 For example, Rebecca Allen has begun the process of digitizing her 
first animations from when she was a student at RISD. As early 
as 1973, Allen completed a series of computer drawings for an 
animation based on the theme of women and sex. She says:
 The series of drawings were dissected into points and, using punch 
cards and a state-of-the-art computer at Brown University, I created 
animation of a woman provocatively but innocently lifting up her 
dress revealing garter belts and underwear … I liked the contrast 
to the extremely mechanical, tedious, number process of creating 
animation on the computer then. When the animation first appeared 
on the screen, the computer scientists I worked with were not 
amused.
 Rebecca Allen, e-mail message to author, May 30, 2013.
56 Margot Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age 
of Electronic Media  (Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989), 202.
57 Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today , 70.
58 See Lloyd Sumner, The Long Ride  (Harrisburg PA: Stackpole Books, 
1978), 79.
59 Sumner, The Long Ride , 52.
60 See book’s dedication, Sumner, Computer Art and Human Response , 
5.
61 Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet  
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 31.
62 Grace Hertlein, “An Artist Views Discovery through Computer-Aided 
Graphics,” Computers and Automation  (August 1970): 26.
63 John Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” New York Times , 
August 30, 1970, 87.
64 Canaday, “Less Art.”
65 For examples, see Michael Apter, “Cybernetics and Art,” Leonardo  
2, no. 3 (1969): 257–265; and Herbert W. Franke, “A Cybernetic 
Approach to Aesthetics,” Leonardo  10, no. 3 (1977): 203–206.
66 Franke, “A Cybernetic Approach to Aesthetics,” 203.
67 Herbert W. Franke, “Some Remarks on Visual Fine Art in the Age of 
Advanced Technology,” Leonardo  8, no. 2 (1975): 154.
68 Stroud Cornock and Ernest Edmonds, “The Creative Process Where 
the Artist Is Amplified or Superseded by the Computer,” Leonardo  6, 
no. 1 (1973): 11–16.
69 Hiroshi Kawano, “What Is Computer Art?,” in Artist and Computer , 
ed. R. Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 112.
NOTES 284
70 Colette S. Bangert and Charles Jeffery Bangert, “Experiences in 
Making Drawings by Computer and by Hand,” Leonardo  7, no. 4 
(1974): 289.
71 Vera Molnar, “Towards Aesthetic Guidelines for Paintings with the 
Aid of a Computer,” Leonardo  8, no. 3 (1975): 185.
72 Molnar, “Towards Aesthetic Guidelines,” 189.
73 Molnar, “Towards Aesthetic Guidelines,” 185.
74 Manfred Mohr, “Manfred Mohr,” in Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth 
Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 95.
75 Mohr, “Manfred Mohr,” 96.
76 Mohr, “Manfred Mohr.”
77 Originally from Waldemar Cordeiro, Arteonica: o Uso Criativo de 
Meios Eletronicos nas Artes  (San Paulo: Editora da Americas 1972), 
4; cited in Annateresa Fabis, “Waldemar Cordeiro: Computer Art 
Pioneer,” Leonardo  30, no. 1 (1997): 28.
78 Manfred Mohr, Artist ’s Statement 2000 , in The Rave Webmuseum’s 
Spotlight Gallery, Manfred Mohr Retrospective Exhibition, accessed 
July 15, 2013, http://www.emohr.com/ww2_out.html .
79 Thomas Kurtz, “The Courage of One’s Convictions,” in Manfred 
Mohr , ed. Marion Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai Nadin (Zurich: 
Waser Verlag, 1994), 22.
80 Pamela McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code: Meta-Art, Artificial Intelligence, and 
the Work of Harold Cohen  (New York: W H Freeman & Co., 1991), 41.
81 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 23.
82 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 25.
83 Howard Cohen, “Parallel to Perception: Some Notes on the 
Problem of Machine-Generated Art,” Computer Studies  IV (1973): 
2, accessed July 20, 2013, http://crca.ucsd.edu/~hcohen/cohenpdf/
paralleltoperception.pdf .
84 Cohen, “Parallel to Perception.”
85 Cohen, “Parallel to Perception,” 5.
86 While Cohen has not yet reached the goal of full autonomy, the artist 
recently stated: “full autonomy is reachable; but not by me and a 
very long way off.” The artist sees himself as more of a collaborator 
with AARON, a unique union between artist and program 
that allows the artist to “access parts” of himself that perhaps 
were “otherwise unreachable.” Cohen’s recent 2011 exhibition 
“Collaborations with My Other Self” explores this symbiotic 
relationship. Harold Cohen, e-mail message to author, June 18, 2013.
NOTES 285
87 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 50.
88 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 51.
89 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 65.
90 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 40.
91 See, Sherry Turkle, The Second Self: Computers and the Human 
Spirit  (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), 33.
92 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 40.
93 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code .
94 Moira Roth, “Harold Cohen on Art & the Machine,” Art in 
America  (September/October 1978): 106–110.
95 McCorduck, Aaron ’s Code , 41.
96 See, Turkle, The Second Self , 104.
97 Vera Molnar, “Vera Molnar,” Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth Leavitt 
(New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 35.
98 Molnar, “Towards Aesthetic Guidelines,” 186.
99 Grace Hertlein, “Thirteenth Annual Computer Art Exposition,” 
Computers and People  (August 1975): 20.
100 Edward Zajec and Matjaz Hmeljak, “Computer Art: the Embryonic 
Stages of a New Art,” Computers and People  (August-September 
1978): 25.
101 Turkle, The Second Self , 105.
102 Dietrich, “Visual Intelligence,”161.
103 Mihai Nadin, “Alea Iacta Est,” in Manfred Mohr , ed. Marion 
Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai Nadin (Zurich: Waser Verlag, 
1994), 58.
104 Grace Hertlein, “Twelfth Annual Computer Art Exposition,” 
Computers and People  8 (August 1974): 11.
105 Hertlein, “Twelfth Annual,” 8.
106 Kurtz, “The Courage of One’s Convictions,” 22.
107 Mohr, “Manfred Mohr,” 94.
108 Mohr, “Manfred Mohr.”
109 Robert Mallary, “Robert Mallary,” in Artist and Computer , ed. 
Ruth Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 8.
110 J. Gips and G. Stiny, Algorithnic Aesthetics: Computer Models for 
Criticism and Design in the Arts  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1978); J. Gips and G. Stiny, “An Investigation of Algorithmic 
Aesthetics,” Leonardo  8 (1975): 213–220.
NOTES 286
111 Gips and Stiny, “An Investigation of Algorithmic Aesthetics,” 213.
112 Stiny, “An Investigation.”
113 J. Gips, Shape Grammars and Their Uses: Artificial Perception, 
Shape Generation and Computer Aesthetics  (Birkhauser: Vergal 
Basel, 1975), 1.
114 Cynthia Goodman, Digital Visions: Computers and Art  (New York: 
Times Mirror Books, 1987), 15.
115 Margot Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age 
of Electronic Media  (Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989), 160.
116 Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents , 162.
117 Michael Rush, New Media in the Late 20th Century Art  (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1999), 172.
118 Schwartz, Lillian. F, with Laurens R. Schwartz, The Computer 
Artist ’s Handbook: Concepts, Techniques, and Applications  
(New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1992), 9.
119 Schwartz with Schwartz, The Computer Artist ’s Handbook .
120 Stuart Smith, “The Computer May Turn Us All into Artists,” 
Computers and People  8 (1974): 28.
121 Karen Loewengart, Computer Genesis: A Vision of the 70s , 
exhibition catalogue (New York: Joe and Emily Lowe Art Gallery, 
1977).
122 Robert Mueller, “Idols of Computer Art,” Art in America  (May/June 
1972): 68.
123 Mueller, “Idols of Computer,” 72.
124 Mueller, “Idols of Computer,” 69.
125 John Canaday, “Less Art, More Computer, Please,” New York 
Times , 30th August 1970, 87.
126 Canaday, “Less Art, More.”
127 Mezei, “Leslie Mezei,” 23.
128 Mallary, “Robert Mallary,” 8.
129 Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today , 72.
130 Edmund C. Berkeley, “Editorial: Computer Art and the Eye of the 
Beholder,” Computers and People  26 (1977): 16.
131 Nicolas Negroponte, “The Return of the Sunday Painter,” in The 
Computer Age: A Twenty-Year View , ed. Michael L. Dertouzos and 
Joel Moses (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1979), 21.
132 Arron Marcus, “Arron Marcus,” in Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth 
Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 14.
NOTES 287
133 Max Bill, “The Mathematical Way of Thinking in the Visual Art of 
Our Time,” in The Visual Mind: Art and Mathematics , ed. Michele 
Emmer (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1993).
134 Briony Fer, On Abstract Art  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1997), 2.
135 Fer, On Abstract Art , 2.
136 Fer, On Abstract Art , 57.
137 Gary Stephan, “Escher or Newman: Who Puts the Ghost in the 
Machine,” Art Forum  21 (February 1983): 65.
138 John D. Barrow, The Artful Universe  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1995), 104.
139 Mueller, “Idols of Computer Art,” 70.
140 Barrow, The Artful Universe , 105.
141 Robert E. Mueller, The Science of Art: The Cybernetics of Creative 
Communication  (London: Rapp & Whiting, 1967), 274.
142 Mueller, “Idols of Computer Art,” 70.
143 Frieder Nake, “There Should Be No Computer Art,” PAGE: 
Computer Art Society Bulletin  18 (October 1971): 18–19.
144 Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today , 60.
145 A. Michael Noll, “Art Ex Machina,” IEEE Student Journal  8, no. 4 
(September 1970): 11.
146 Roth, “Harold Cohen on Art & the Machine,” 110.
147 Frank J. Malina, “Comments on Visual Fine Art Produced by 
Digital Computers,” Leonardo  4, no. 3 (1971): 263.
148 Malina, “Comments on Visual,” 264.
149 Bob Draper, “Computer Art,” New Scientist  (December 1974): 830.
150 Draper, “Computer Art.”
151 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
152 Grace Hertlein, “Computers, Technology, and the Arts,” Computers 
and People  (August 1974): 6.
153 Grace Hertlein, “A Defense of Computer Art and Graphics,” 
Computers and People  (August 1975): 6.
154 Draper, “Computer Art,” 830.
155 Negroponte, “The Return of the Sunday Painter,” 21.
156 The work produced through research would be entered into 
the Computers and Automation  annual competition and would 
adorn the company’s own advertising. In 1968 Calcomp held its 
NOTES 288
own competition for the best computer graphics. The company’s 
competition was titled “Computer Plotter Art” and offered 
scholarships and cash awards. Calcomp made a statement to the 
effect that they were convinced that computer/plotter art would 
be accepted as a recognized art form “if only because it gives a 
humanizing aura to machinery.” For example, see advertisement in 
Computers and Automation  (1968).
157 Grace Hertlein, “Computer Art: The Search beyond Manipulation,” 
Computers and Automation  22 (November 1973): 18.
158 Leavitt, Artist and Computer , vii.
159 Ken Knowlton, “Collaborations with Artists: A Programmer’s 
Reflection,” Graphic Languages: Proceedings of the IFIP Working 
Conference on Graphics Languages , ed. F. Nake and A. Rosenfeld 
(London: North-Holland Publishing, 1972), 399.
160 Mohr, “Manfred Mohr,” 92.
161 Manfred Mohr, e-mail message to author, August 1, 2003.
162 Grace Hertlein, “Thirty Reactions to Computer Art,” Computers 
and People  (August 1974): 6.
163 Mezei, “Leslie Mezei,” 23.
164 Negroponte, “The Return of the Sunday Painter,” 21.
165 Donald Michie and Rory Johnston, The Creative Computer: Machine 
Intelligence and Human Knowledge  (Harmondsworth: Viking, 1984).
166 John Cohen, “Creativity, Technology and the Arts,” in Cybernetics, 
Art and Ideas , ed. Jasia Reichardt (London: Studio Vista, 1971).
167 Jasia Reichardt, ed., Cybernetics, Art and Ideas  (London: Studio 
Vista, 1971), 14.
168 David Antin, “Television: Video’s Frightful Parent,” Art Forum  14 
(1975): 36.
169 Antin, “Television.”
170 Grace Glueck, “Video Comes into Its Own a the Whitney Biennial,” 
New York Times , April 23, 1983. A. 33.
171 Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents , 195.
Chapter four
1 Roman Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype, a New 
Dimension of Art,” Leonardo  23, no. 1 (1990): 23. Paper first given 
at the first International Symposium of Electronic Art, Utrecht, 1988.
NOTES 289
2 David Em, “A Note about My Work,” in The Art of David Em , ed. 
David A. Ross and David Em (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1988), 
20.
3 Lillian F. Schwartz with Laurens R. Schwartz, The Computer Artist ’s 
Handbook: Concepts, Techniques, and Applications  (New York: W. 
W. Norton & Company, 1992), 3.
4 Donald Michie and Rory Johnston, The Creative Computer: Machine 
Intelligence and Human Knowledge  (Harmondsworth: Viking, 1984), 
139.
5 Roman Verostko, “Algorithmic Art: Composing the Score for Visual 
Art,” accessed July 20, 2013, http://www.verostko.com/algorithm.
html.
6 Frank Dietrich, “Visual Intelligence: The First Decade of Computer 
Art (1965–1975),” Leonardo  19, no. 2 (1986): 161.
7 Arthur Efland, “An Interview with Charles Csuri,” in Cybernetic 
Serendipity: The Computer and Art , ed. Jasia Reichardt (New York: 
Praeger, 1968), 84.
8 Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 7.
9 Melvin Prueitt, Art and the Computer  (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1984).
10 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , vii.
11 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 106.
12 James Gleick, Chaos: Making of a New Science  (London: Cardinal, 
1987), 6.
13 N. Katherine Hayles, Chaos Bound: Orderly Disorder in 
Contemporary Literature and Science  (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1990), 22.
14 Hayles, Chaos Bound , 3.
15 Charlie Gere, Digital Culture  (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), 123.
16 Stuart Sim, Jean François Lyotard  (London: Prentice Hall, 1996), 40.
17 Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on 
Knowledge  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), 60.
18 Benoît Mandelbrot, “Fractals and the Rebirth of Iteration Theory,” 
in The Beauty of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems , 
ed. Heinz-Otto Peitgen and P. H. Richter (New York: Springer-Verlag, 
1986), 151.
19 Rhonda Shearer, “Chaos Theory and Fractal Geometry: Their Potential 
Impact on the Future of Art,” Leonardo  25, no. 2 (1992): 143.
NOTES 290
20 Shearer, “Chaos Theory.”
21 Frank Popper, “The Place of High-Technology Art in the 
Contemporary Art Scene,” Leonardo  26, no. 1 (1993): 68.
22 Pickover, Clifford. Computers, Pattern, Chaos and Beauty: Graphics 
from an Unseen World  (London: Alan Sutton, 1990), 7.
23 Judson Rosebush, “The Proceduralist Manifesto,” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 55.
24 Benoît Mandelbrot, “Fractal and an Art for the Sake of Science,” 
Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 21.
25 Mandelbrot, “Fractal and an Art.”
26 Pickover, Computers, Pattern, Chaos and Beauty , 110.
27 It was the mathematicians, such as Peitgen and Richter, who had 
toured international exhibitions, and the technologists, at large 
computer corporations like IBM, who implemented fractal geometry 
into graphic systems.
28 Heinz-Otto Peitgen and P. H. Richter, The Beauty of Fractals: Images 
of Complex Dynamical Systems  (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986), 1.
29 Pickover, Computers, Pattern, Chaos and Beauty , vii.
30 John Horgan, The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge 
in the Twilight of the Scientific Age  (New York: Broadway Books, 
1996), 194.
31 F. Kenton Musgrave, “Formal Logic and Self-Expression,” accessed 
June 11, 2003, http://www.kenmusgrave.com/FLnSE_text.html .
32 See, F. Kenton Musgrave, “Brief Introduction to the Online Gallery,” 
accessed June 11, 2003, http://www.kenmusgrave.com/gallery_intro.
html; Mandelbrot, Fractals and an Art for the Sake of Science , 
23; and F. Kenton Musgrave and Benoît Mandelbrot, “Natura ex 
Machina,” IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications  (January 
1989): 4.
33 Musgrave, “Brief Introduction to the Online Gallery.”
34 Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype,” 18.
35 Born in Tarrs, a coal mining region of Western Pennsylvania, 
Verostko first studied illustration at the Art Institute of Pittsburgh. 
After graduating, Verostko took up philosophy at St Vincent College 
in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, before entering the seminary to study 
theology, eventually becoming a Benedictine monk. Before leaving 
monastic life, Verostko travelled and studied widely and completed 
monastic assignments that included writing on art and architecture 
for the New Catholic Encyclopedia.
NOTES 291
36 Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype,” 18.
37 Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype,” 18.
38 Roman Verostko, e-mail message to author, February 21, 2003.
39 Verostko, e-mail message to author, February 21, 2003.
40 Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype,” 19.
41 Verostko, “ Algorithmic Art .”
42 Verostko, “ Algorithmic Art .”
43 Verostko, “ Algorithmic Art .”
44 Feature films that include significant computer generation, 
include The Last Starfighter  (1982) Star Trek II: The Wrath of 
Khan  (1983) Tron  (1980) and many other. In television, the first 
computer-generated 30 second commercial “Brilliance” (aired at 
the American Football Super Bowl 1983) and Max Headroom  
(1985) computer-mediated live action figure captivated a popular 
audience.
45 Cynthia Goodman, Digital Visions: Computers and Art  (New York: 
Times Mirror Books, 1987), 12.
46 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , vi.
47 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , vii.
48 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , 2.
49 Margot Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age 
of Electronic Media  (Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989), 165.
50 Robert Rivlin, The Algorithmic Image: Graphic Visions of the 
Computer Age  (Redmond, Wash: Microsoft Press, 1986), 4.
51 Michie and Johnston, The Creative Computer , 140.
52 Mark Resch, “Editorial: Computers, Art and Context,” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 2.
53 Resch, “Editorial: Computers.”
54 Resch, “Editorial: Computers.”
55 Rebecca Allen, telephone interview with author, December 8, 2011.
56 Mark Wilson, Drawing with Computers: The Artist’s Guide to 
Computer Graphics  (New York: Perigee Books, 1985), 32.
57 Herbert W. Franke, “Refractions of Science into Art,” in The Beauty 
of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems , ed. Heinz-Otto 
Peitgen and P. H. Richter (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1986).
58 Jean-Pierre Hébert, recorded interview with author, August 2010, 
Santa Barbara, CA.
NOTES 292
59 Joan Truckenbrod, Creative Computer Imaging  (New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall, Inc, 1988), 165.
60 Schwartz, The Computer Artist ’s Handbook , 289.
61 Schwartz, The Computer Artist ’s Handbook , 235.
62 Schwartz, The Computer Artist ’s Handbook , 16.
63 Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet  
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 32.
64 Turkle, Life on the Screen .
65 Turkle, Life on the Screen , 34.
66 Edward Zajec, “Edward Zajec,” in Artist and Computer , ed. Ruth 
Leavitt (New York: Harmony Books, 1976), 52.
67 Phillip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, Descartes ’ Dream: The World 
According to Mathematics  (Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1986), 
53.
68 Zajec, “ Edward Zajec ,” 53.
69 Herbert W. Franke, “The Expanding Medium: The Future of 
Computer Art,” Leonardo  20, no. 4 (1987): 336.
70 Michie and Johnston, The Creative Computer , 147.
71 Robert Preusser, “Revitalizing Art and Humanizing Technology,” 
Impact of Science on Society  24, no. 1 (1974): 57.
72 Roger F. Malina, “Computer Art in Context of the Journal 
Leonardo,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 68.
73 Mihai Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues in Computer 
Art,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 44.
74 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues.”
75 Musgrave, “Formal Logic and Self-Expression.”
76 Michie and Johnston, The Creative Computer , 147.
77 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues,” 44.
78 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues,” 46.
79 Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , 122.
80 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues,”47.
81 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues.”
82 Harold Cohen, “Off the Shelf,” The Visual Computer  2, no. 3 (1986): 
191–194.
83 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , 34.
84 Prueitt, Art and the Computer , 30.
NOTES 293
85 John R. Pierce, “Portrait of the Machine as a Young Artist,” Playboy  
12, no. 6, June 1965.
86 Grace Glueck, “Portrait of the Artist as a Young Computer,” New 
York Times , February 20, 1983, 31.
87 Cohen, “Off the Shelf,”192.
88 Cohen, “Off the Shelf.”
89 Cohen, “Off the Shelf,” 191.
90 Rudolf Arnheim, New Essays on the Psychology of Art  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1986), 129.
91 Michie and Johnston, The Creative Computer , 140.
92 Glueck, “Portrait of the Artist as a Young Computer,” 31.
93 Timothy Binkley, “The Wizard of Ethereal Pictures and Virtual 
Places,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 18.
94 Rolf Liese, “Welcome Address,” in Images Digital: Computer Artists 
in Germany 1986 , ed. Alex and Barbara Kempkens (Munich: Barke, 
1986), 8.
95 Jean-Pierre Hébert, recorded interview conducted with author, 
August 2010, Santa Barbara, CA.
96 Franke, “Refractions of Science into Art,” 186.
97 Theodore Roszak, The Cult of Information: The Folklore of 
Computers and the True Art of Thinking  (New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1986), xi.
98 Roszak, The Cult of Information , ix.
99 Roszak, The Cult of Information , xii.
100 Paul Brown, “An Emergent Paradigm,” Periphery  29 (November 
1996): 14.
101 Franke, “The Expanding Medium,” 336.
102 Negroponte, “The Return of the Sunday Painter,” 35.
103 A. Michael Noll, “Computers and the Visual Arts: A Retrospective 
View,” SIGGRAPH Art Show Catalog , ed. Copper Giloth (Boston, 
MA: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1982), 5.
104 Gene Youngblood, “A Medium Matures: The Myth of Computer 
Art,” In SIGGRAPH 1983, Exhibition of Computer Art Catalog , ed. 
Copper Giloth (Detroit, Michigan: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1983), n.p.
105 Franke, “The Expanding Medium,” 336.
106 Franke, “The Expanding Medium.”
107 Malina, “Computer Art in Context,” 67.
NOTES 294
108 Davis and Hersh, Descartes ’ Dream , 53.
109 Wilson, Drawing with Computers , 119.
110 Nicholas Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003), 
accessed July 20, 2013, http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/ .
111 Lambert, “A Critical Examination.”
112 Lambert, “A Critical Examination.”
113 Truckenbrod, Creative Computer Imaging , 167.
114 Yoichiro Kawaguchi, Digital Image  (Tokyo: ASCII Publishing, 1981), 7.
115 Goodman, Digital Visions: Computers and Art , 16.
Chapter five
1 The significance of the CAA (College Art Association) annual 
meeting of 1989 is that the papers presented became the material for 
the 1990 fall edition of Art Journal . Also, the essays presented at the 
“Computer Art in Context” conference panel (The SIGGRAPH ‘89 
Art Show Catalog) formed the material for the supplemental issue of 
Leonardo  in 1989.
2 Mark Resch, “Editorial: Computers, Art and Context,” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 2.
3 Donald Michie and Rory Johnston, The Creative Computer: Machine 
Intelligence and Human Knowledge  (Harmondsworth: Viking, 1984), 
161.
4 Michie and Johnston, The Creative Computer , 164.
5 Roger Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal 
Leonardo ,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 69.
6 Kenneth Knowlton, “Why It Isn’t Art Yet,” SIGGRAPH 1986 
Electronic Art and Animation Catalog  (New York: ACM, Inc, 1986).
7 Ed Duin, “Comments on Art and Technology in Public Places,” 
Leonardo  19, no. 4 (1986): 355.
8 David Carrier, “The Arts and Science and Technology: Problems and 
Prospects,” Leonardo  21, no. 4 (1988): 341.
9 Mihai Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics—Aesthetic Issues in Computer 
Art,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 43–48.
10 Nadin, “Emergent Aesthetics,” 43.
11 Roger Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal 
Leonardo ,” 69.
NOTES 295
12 Cathy Curtis, “Computer Art’s Not So Nerdy Anymore,” Los Angeles 
Times , February 20, 1989, accessed March 12, 2013, http://articles.
latimes.com/1989-02-20/entertainment/ca-230_1_computer-art .
13 Delle Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” in Computers in Art and 
Design , ed. Issac V. Kerlow (Las Vegas: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1991), 
95.
14 Dorothy Spencer, “Computer Art—an Oxymoron? Views from the 
Mainstream,” SIGGRAPH 89 Panel Proceedings , ed. Robert L. Judd, 
23, no. 5 (New York: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1989), 221.
15 Spencer, “Computer Art,” 212.
16 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 95.
17 Paul Brown, “Beyond Art,” in Visions of the Future—Art, Technology 
and Computing in the Twenty-First Century , ed. Clifford A. Pickover 
(New York: St Martin’s Press, 1992), 199. According to the author’s 
Web site, this essay was written in 1989 and an edited version 
appeared as “Metamedia and CyberSpace—Advanced Computers 
and the Future of Art,” in Culture Technology and Creativity in the 
Late 20th Century , ed. P. Heywood (Arts Council of Great Britain: 
John Lebby Press, 1990).
18 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 95.
19 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?”
20 Richard Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated 
Art: A Delphi Study” (Masters of Arts diss., the Ohio State 
University, 1986).
21 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 1.
22 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 4.
23 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 9.
24 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 19.
25 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 39.
26 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 76
27 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 45.
28 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 36.
29 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 24.
30 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 20.
31 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 19.
32 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 22.
33 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 46.
34 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 13.
NOTES 296
35 Timothy Binkley, “The Wizard of Ethereal Pictures and Virtual 
Places,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 20.
36 See introduction to Stuart Sim’s Irony and Crisis: A Critical History 
of Postmodern Culture  (London: Icon Books, 2002).
37 Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on 
Knowledge  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), xxv.
38 Robert E. Mueller, “When Is Computer Art Art?,” Creative 
Computing  9, no. 1 (1983): 136.
39 Mueller, “When Is Computer,” 144.
40 Harold Cohen, “Off the Shelf,” The Visual Computer  2, no. 3 (1986): 
191.
41 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo ,” 67.
42 Terry Gips, “Critical Questions for Computer Artists of the 1990s,” 
in NCGA Conference Proceedings, Vol II  (Arlington, VA: National 
Computer Graphics Association, 1990): 364.
43 Nicholas Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003), 
accessed July 20, 2013, http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/ .
44 Terry Gips, “Computer and Art: Issues of Content,” Art Journal  49, 
no. 3 (Fall 1990): 229.
45 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
46 Judson Rosebush, “The Proceduralist Manifesto,” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 55.
47 Brian R. Smith, “Beyond Computer Art,” Leonardo , Supplemental 
Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 41.
48 Gips, “Computer and Art: Issues of Content,” 231.
49 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
50 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
51 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
52 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
53 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
54 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
55 Gips, “Computer and Art.”
56 Margot Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age 
of Electronic Media  (Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989).
57 Margot Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism: Paradigms, 
Parallels, and Paradoxes,” Art Journal  49, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 257.
NOTES 297
58 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism,” 261.
59 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism,” 257.
60 Walter Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction  (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1963).
61 See, Herbert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. 
G. Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 119.
62 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism,” 261.
63 Brian Wallis, ed. Art after Modernism: Essays on Rethinking 
Representation  (New York: New Museum of Contemporary Art, 
1984).
64 Donna Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism: Computer Art, Scientific 
Visualization and Other Paradoxes,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, 
vol. 2 (1989): 8. For original quote, see Abigail Solomon-Godeau, 
“Photography after Art Photography,” in Art after Modernism , ed. 
Brian Willis (Boston: D.R. Godine, 1984), 80.
65 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 9.
66 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 11.
67 See, Timothy Binkley, “Refiguring Culture,” in Future Visions: New 
Technologies of the Screen , ed. P. Hayeard and T. Wollen (London: 
BFI, 1993); Timothy Binkley, “Transparent Technology: The Swan 
Song of Electronics,” Leonardo  28, no. 5 (1995): 427–432.
68 See, Binkley, “The Wizard of Ethereal Pictures and Virtual Places,”18; 
and also Timothy Binkley, “The Quickening of Galatea: Virtual 
Creation without Tools or Media,” Art Journal  49, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 
233–240.
69 Binkley, “The Wizard of Ethereal Pictures and Virtual Places,” 19.
70 Beverly Jones, “Computer Imagery: Imitation and Representation of 
Realities,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1990): 31–38.
71 Jones, “Computer Imagery,” 37.
72 Frank Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step,” Leonardo  20, no. 
4 (1987): 301–303.
73 John Rajchman, “The Postmodern Museum,” Art in America  
(October 1985): 111.
74 Jones, “Computer Imagery,” 31.
75 Copper Giloth, telephone interview with author, October, 2011.
76 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art,” 39.
77 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
78 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
NOTES 298
79 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
80 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
81 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
82 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art,” 40.
83 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art.”
84 Smith, “Beyond Computer Art,” 41.
85 Tom DeWitt, “Dataism: Aesthetic Premise of Computer Art,” 
Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 58.
86 DeWitt, “Dataism,” 57.
87 DeWitt, “Dataism,” 58.
88 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 10.
89 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 11.
90 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism.”
91 See, Tim Folger, “Art for Science’s Sake,” Discover  12, no. 10 
(1991): 18–21.
92 Margaret Neal, “More Than Science More Than Art,” IEEE 
Computer Graphics & Applications , 8, no. 6 (November 1988): 3.
93 Donna Cox, “Renaissance Teams and Scientific Visualization: 
A Convergence of Art and Science” (paper presented at the 
SIGGRAPH: Educator’s Workshop Proceedings 1988 (ACM/
SIGGRAPH)): 81–104.
94 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo .”
95 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo ,” 
67.
96 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo .”
97 Pamela Grant-Ryan, “Why Leonardo? Past, Present and Future,” 
Leonardo  20, no. 4 (1987): 397.
98 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo ,” 
68.
99 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo .”
100 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo .”
101 Malina, “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal Leonardo ,” 
70.
102 Frank Popper, Art of the Electronic Age  (London: Thames & 
Hudson Ltd., 1993).
103 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step,” 301.
104 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step.”
NOTES 299
105 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step,” 302.
106 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step.”
107 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step.”
108 Popper, “Technoscience Art: The Next Step.”
109 Steven Shapin, The Scientific Revolution  (Chicago: University of 
Chicago, 1996), 13.
110 Jürgen Habermas, “Modernity: An Incomplete Project,” in 
Postmodern Culture , ed. Hal Foster (London: Pluto Press, 1985), 4.
111 Kenneth Knowlton, “On Frustrations of Collaborating with 
Artists,” Computer Graphics  35, no. 3 (August 2001): 22.
112 Habermas, “Modernity: An Incomplete Project,” 5.
113 Rosalind Krauss, “Sculpture in the Expanded Field,” in Postmodern 
Culture , ed. Hal Foster (London: Pluto, 1985), 32.
114 Quoted in Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art.’” 
For original translated text, see Roy Ascott, Prix Ars Electronica  
Hannes Leopoldseder (Linz, 1991), 29.
115 Gene Youngblood, “A Medium Matures: The Myth of Computer 
Art,” in 1983 SIGGRAPH, Exhibition of Computer Art Catalog , ed. 
Copper Giloth (Detroit, MI: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1983), n.p.
116 Kate Linker, “A Reflection on Post-Modernism,” Art Forum  24 
(September 1985): 104.
117 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 11.
118 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism.”
119 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism,” 9.
120 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism.”
121 Cox, “The Tao of Postmodernism.”
122 John Loscerbo, Being and Technology: A Study in the Philosophy of 
Martin Heidegger  (Boston: The Hague, 1981).
123 Sim, Irony and Crisis , 169.
124 Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge , 4.
125 Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition .
126 Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition ,7.
127 Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition , 11.
128 Jean Baudrillard, Simulations  (New York: Semiotexte, 1983), 111.
129 Frederic Jameson, “Postmodernism and Consumer Society,” in 
Postmodern Culture , ed. Hal Foster (London: Pluto Press, 1985), 
115.
NOTES 300
130 Jameson, “Postmodernism.”
131 Binkley, “The Quickening of Galatea,” 239.
132 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism,” 259.
133 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism.”
134 Charles Csuri, “Art and Animation,” IEEE Computer Graphics & 
Applications  (January 1991): 34.
135 Brown, “Beyond Art,” 202.
136 Lucas, “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated Art,” 12.
137 Brown, “Beyond Art,” 199.
138 Brown, “Beyond Art.”
139 Roger F. Malina, “Digital Image—Digital Cinema: The Work of 
Art in the Age of Post-Mechanical Reproduction,” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 3 (1990): 37.
140 Paul Brown, “Emergent Behaviours: Towards Computational 
Aesthetics,” Artlink  16, no. 2&3 (July 1996), accessed July 5, 2013, 
http://www.artlink.com.au/articles.cfm?id=457 .
141 Brown, “Emergent Behaviours.”
142 Brown, “Emergent Behaviours.”
143 Nancy Hays, “An Artist Thanks to the Medium,” IEEE Computer 
Graphics & Applications  (September 1994): 7.
144 Hays, “An Artist Thanks.”
145 Hays, “An Artist Thanks.”
146 Hays, “An Artist Thanks.”
147 Rosebush, “The Proceduralist Manifesto,” 55.
148 Rosebush, “The Proceduralist Manifesto.”
149 Rosebush, “The Proceduralist Manifesto.”
150 F. Kenton Musgrave, “Formal Logic and Self-Expression.”
151 Musgrave, “Formal Logic and Self-Expression.”
152 Others include Stephen Bell, Peter Beyls, and Brian Evans.
153 Roman Verostko, “Algorithms and the Artist,” accessed April 20, 
2012, http://www.verostko.com/alg-isea94.html .
154 Verostko, “Algorithms.”
155 Verostko, “Algorithms.”
156 Roman Verostko, “Algorithmic Art: Composing the Score for Visual 
Art,” accessed July 20, 2013, http://www.verostko.com/algorithm.
html.
NOTES 301
157 Brown, “Emergent Behaviours: Towards Computational Aesthetics.”
158 Jonathan Benthall, Science and Technology in Art Today  (New 
York: Praeger Publishers, 1972), 66.
159 See, Yoichiro Kawaguchi, Digital Image  (Tokyo: ASCII Publishing, 
1981).
160 John H. Hubbard, The Beauty and Complexity of Mandelbrot 
Sets, video recording, Gary Welz (Director) (New York: Science 
Television Company, 1989).
161 Roman Verostko, “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype, a 
New Dimension of Art,” Leonardo  23, no. 1 (1990): 17–23.
162 Michael Whitelaw, “Tom Ray’s Hammer: Emergence and Excess in 
a-Life Art,” Leonardo  31, no. 5 (1998): 377.
163 Paul Brown, “From System Art to Artificial Life: Early Generative 
Art at the Slade School of Fine Art,” in White Heat Cold Logic: 
British Computer Art 1960–1980 , ed. Paul Brown, Charlie Gere, 
Nicholas Lambert, and Catherine Mason (Cambridge MA: The 
MIT Press, 2009).
164 Steven Levy, Artificial Life  (New York: Pantheon, 1992), 175.
165 Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker  (New York: W.W. Norton 
& Company, 1996). 65.
166 Daniel Bennett, Darwin ’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the 
Meaning of Life  (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 107.
167 Stephen Todd and William Latham, Evolutionary Art and 
Computers  (London: Academic Press, 1992).
168 Todd and Latham, Evolutionary Art , 2.
169 Herbert W. Franke, “Mathematics As An Artistic-Generative 
Principle,” Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 25.
170 Benoît Mandelbrot, “Fractal and an Art for the Sake of Science,” 
Leonardo , Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 24.
171 Mandelbrot, “Fractal and an Art.”
172 Malina, “Digital Image—Digital Cinema,” 37.
173 Malina, “Digital Image—Digital Cinema,” 36.
174 Malina, “Digital Image—Digital Cinema,” 37.
175 Gips, “Computer and Art: Issues of Content,” 231.
176 Gips, “Computer and Art: Issues of Content.”
177 Malina, “Digital Image—Digital Cinema,” 37.
178 See, Jonathan Harris, The New Art History: A Critical Introduction  
(London: Routledge, 2001), 209.
NOTES 302
179 Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet  
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 36.
180 Turkle, Life on the Screen .
181 Jameson, “Postmodernism and Consumer Society,” 113.
182 Anna Campbell Bliss, “New Technologies of Art—Where Art and 
Science Meet: Conference Report,” Leonardo  19, no. 4 (1986): 
311–317.
183 Anne M. Spalter, The Computer in the Visual Arts  (Reading, 
Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1999), 29.
184 Krauss, “Sculpture in the Expanded Field,” 41.
185 Krauss, “Sculpture in the Expanded Field.”
186 Lovejoy, “Art, Technology and Postmodernism,” 262.
187 Richard Wright, “The Image in Art and ‘Computer Art,’” Leonardo , 
Supplemental Issue, vol. 2 (1989): 49.
188 Wright, “The Image in Art.”
Epilogue
1 Nicholas Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003), 
accessed July 20, 2013, http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/ .
2 Jasia Reichardt, The Computer in Art  (London: Studio Vista Limited, 
1971), 7.
3 Reichardt, The Computer in Art .
4 Reichardt, The Computer in Art .
5 Margot Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age 
of Electronic Media  (Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989), 165.
6 Lovejoy, Postmodernist Currents .
7 Mike King, “Computer and Modern Art: Digital Art Museum,” 
Creativity and Cognition 2002 , proceedings of the 4th Creativity 
and Cognition Conference, ed. Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds 
(Loughborough University, UK., and New York: ACM Press, 2002), 
93.
8 Mark Wilson, e-mail message to author, February 1, 2003.
9 Wilson, e-mail message.
10 Timothy Binkley, “Does Art Compute? The Myths, the Madness, and 
the Magic,” Art & Academe  1, no. 1 (1988): 90.
NOTES 303
11 Delle Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” in Computers in Art and 
Design , ed. Isaac V. Kerlow (Las Vegas: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1991), 
101.
12 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 96.
13 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 94.
14 See Clifford Pickover, ed., Visions of the Future: Art, Technology and 
Computing in the 21st Century  (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992), 
xix, and Craig Hickman, “Why Artists Should Program,” Leonardo  
24, no. 1 (1991): 49.
15 Lev Manovich, “The Death of Computer Art,” The Net Net Blog, 
accessed February 16, 2004, http://www.thenetnet.com/schmeb/
schmeb12.html .
16 Manovich, “The Death of Computer Art.”
17 Patric D. Prince, “Digital Art: The New Literacy, a Personal View 
of the Evolution of Art Issues,” Computer Graphics  29, no. 4 
(November 1995): 30.
18 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 94.
19 Gary Greenfield, “The Next Computer Art,” Leonardo  32, no. 4 
(1999): 340.
20 For a full account of the formation of the Algorists refer to Grant 
D. Taylor, “Linearity and the Algorithmic Search,” in The American 
Algorists: Linear Sublime , exhibition catalog (Annville, PA: Suzanne 
H. Arnold Art Gallery, Lebanon Valley College, 2013).
21 Anne M. Spalter, The Computer in the Visual Arts  (Reading,  
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1999).
22 Michael Rush, New Media in the Late 20th Century Art  (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1999).
23 Charlie Gere, Digital Culture  (London: Reaktion Books, 2002), 11.
24 Peter Weibel, “Ars Electronica: An Interview by Johan Pijnappel,” Art 
& Design Profile , no. 39 (1994): 27–31.
25 Patric Prince, “The Art of Understanding: Or a Primer on Why We 
Study History,” SIGGRAPH Art Show Catalog, 2003, accessed  
July 20, 2013, http://www.siggraph.org/artdesign/gallery/S03/essays/
prince.pdf .
26 Roman Verostko, e-mail message to author, February 21, 2003.
27 K. Kenton Musgrave, “Formal Logic and Self-Expression,” accessed 
June 11, 2003. http://www.kenmusgrave.com/FLnSE_text.html .
28 Musgrave, “Formal Logic.”
29 Musgrave, “Formal Logic.”
NOTES 304
30 K. Kenton Musgrave, e-mail message to author, July 2, 2012.
31 James Gips, Shape Grammars and Their Uses: Artificial Perception, 
Shape Generation and Computer Aesthetics  (Birkhauser: Vergal 
Basel, 1975); James Gips and G. Stiny, Algorithmic Aesthetics: 
Computer Models for Criticism and Design in the Arts  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1978).
32 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 97.
33 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 98.
34 Maxwell, “The Emperor’s New Art?,” 99.
35 Nicholas Lambert, “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application” (PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003), 
accessed July 20, 2013, http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/ .
36 Hebert W. Franke, Computer Graphics—Computer Art , trans. G. 
Metzger (New York: Phaidon, 1971).
37 Charlie. Gere, Digital Culture .
38 Jean-Pierre Hébert, recorded interview with author, Santa Barbara, 
CA, August 2010.
39 Harold Rosenberg, The Anxious Object: Art Today and Its Audience , 
(New York: Horizon Press, 1966), 18.
40 Rosenberg, The Anxious Object , 20.
41 Rosenberg, The Anxious Object .
42 Rosenberg, The Anxious Object .
43 Rosenberg, The Anxious Object .
44 Rosenberg, The Anxious Object .
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Antin, David. “Television: Video’s Frightful Parent.” Art Forum  14 (1975): 
36–45.
Apter, Michael. “Cybernetics and Art.” Leonardo  2, no. 3 (1969): 
257–265.
Arnheim, Rudolf. New Essays in the Psychology of Art . Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1986.
Bangert, Colette and Charles Jeffery Bangert. “Experiences in Making 
Drawings by Computer and by Hand.” Leonardo  7, no. 4 (1974): 
289–296.
———.“Computer Grass Is Natural Grass” In Artist and Computer . 
Edited by Ruth Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Barrow, John D. The Artful Universe . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.
Barry, Robert, Alberro Alexander, and Patricia Norvell, ed. Recording 
Conceptual Art . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulations . New York: Semiotexte, 1983.
Bell, Daniel. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social 
Forecasting . New York: Basic Books, 1973.
Benjamin, Walter. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction . Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1963.
Bennett, Daniel C. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meaning 
of Life . New York: Touchstone, 1996.
Bense, Max. Aesthetica: Einführung in die Neue Aesthetik . Baden-Baden: 
Agis-Verlag, 1965.
———.“The Project of Generative Aesthetics.” In Cybernetics, Art and 
Ideas . Edited by Jasia Reichardt. London: Studio Vista, 1971.
Benthall, Jonathan. Science and Technology in Art Today . New York: 
Praeger Publishers, 1972.
Berkeley, Edmund C. Giant Brains or Machines That Think . New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1949.
———. “The Computer and Art.” Computers and Automation  (August 
1963): 3.
———. “Editorial: Computer Art and the Eye of the Beholder.” Computers 
and People  26 (1977): 9.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 306
Bill, Max. “The Mathematical Way of Thinking in the Visual Art of Our 
Time.” In The Visual Mind: Art and Mathematics . Edited by Michele 
Emmer. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1993.
Binkley, Timothy. “Does Art Compute? The Myths, the Madness, and the 
Magic.” Art & Academe  1, no. 1 (1988): 90–99.
———. “The Wizard of Ethereal Pictures and Virtual Places.” Leonardo  
Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 13–20.
———. “The Quickening of Galatea: Virtual Creation Without Tools or 
Media.” Art Journal  49, no. 1 (1990): 233–240.
———. “Refiguring Culture.” In Future Visions: New Technologies of the 
Screen . Edited by P. Hayeard and T. Wollen. London: BFI, 1993.
———. “Transparent Technology: The Swan Song of Electronics.” Leonardo   
28, no. 5 (1995): 427–432.
Birkhoff, George David. Aesthetic Measure . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1933.
Bliss, Anna Campbell. “New Technologies of Art—Where Art and Science 
Meet: Conference Report.” Leonardo  19, no. 4 (1986): 311–317.
Borges, Jorge Luis, James East Irby, André Maurois, and Donald A. 
Yates. Labyrinths: Selected Stories & Other Writings . New York: New 
Directions Pub. Corp., 1964.
———. The Book of Imaginary Beings . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974.
Brockman, John. The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution . 
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Brown, Paul. “Beyond Art.” In Visions of the Future—Art, Technology 
and Computing in the Twenty-First Century . Edited by Clifford A. 
Pickover. New York: St Martin’s Press, 1992.
———. “Emergent Behaviours: Towards Computational 
Aesthetics.” Artlink  16, no. 2&3 (1996). Accessed July 5, 2013. http://
www.artlink.com.au/articles.cfm?id=457 .
Brown, Paul, Charlie Gere, Nicholas Lambert, and Catherine Mason. 
“New Media: An Emergent Paradigm.” Periphery  29 (November 
1996): 13–15.
——— ed. White Heat Cold Logic: British Computer Art 1960–1980 . 
Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 2009.
——— “From System Art to Artificial Life: Early Generative Art at 
the Slade School of Fine Art.” In White Heat Cold Logic: British 
Computer Art 1960–1980 . Edited by Paul Brown, Charlie Gere, 
Nicholas Lambert, and Catherine Mason. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, 2009.
Burnham, Jack. Beyond Modern Sculpture: The Effects of Science and 
Technology on the Sculpture of This Century . New York: George 
Braziller, 1968.
———. “Real Time Systems.” Artforum  8, no. 1 (September 1969): 49–55.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 307
———. “The Aesthetics of Intelligent Systems.” In On the Future of Art . 
Edited by Arnold Toynbee. New York: Viking Press, 1970.
———. “Art and Technology: The Panacea that Failed.” In The Myths 
of Information: Technology and Postindustrial Culture . Edited by 
K.Woodward. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
Carpenter, Rhys. “The Basis Artistic Creation in the Fine Arts.” In 
The Bases of Artistic Creation . Edited by Maxwell Anderson, Rhys 
Carpenter, and Roy Harris. New York: Octagon Books, 1969.
Carrier, David. “The Arts and Science and Technology: Problems and 
Prospects.” Leonardo  21, no. 4 (1988): 341–342.
Cohen, Harold. “Off the Shelf.” The Visual Computer  2, no. 3 (1986): 
191–194.
———. “Parallel to Perception: Some Notes on the Problem of Machine-
Generated Art.” Computer Studies  IV (1973). Accessed July 20, 2013. 
http://crca.ucsd.edu/~hcohen/cohenpdf/paralleltoperception.pdf .
Cohen, John. “Creativity, Technology and the Arts.” In Cybernetics, Art 
and Ideas . Edited by Jasia Reichardt. London: Studio Vista, 1971.
Computer-Generated Pictures. New York Herald Tribune  (April 10, 
1965), 8.
Computer-Generated Pictures. Time  (April 23, 1965), NY, 6.
Cornock, Stroud and Ernest Edmonds. “The Creative Process Where the 
Artist Is Amplified or Superseded by the Computer.” Leonardo  6, no. 1 
(1973): 11–16.
Cotter, Holland. “Art in Review; Wade Guyton.” New York Times  
(December 14, 2007).
Cox, Donna. “Renaissance Teams and Scientific Visualization: 
A Convergence of Art and Science.” Paper presented at the 
SIGGRAPH: Educator’s Workshop Proceedings 1988. SIGGRAPH, 
ACM: 81–104.
———. “The Tao of Postmodernism: Computer Art, Scientific 
Visualization and Other Paradoxes.” Leonardo  Supplemental Issue vol. 
2 (1989): 7–12.
Csuri, Charles. “Art and Animation.” IEEE Computer Graphics & 
Applications  (January 1991): 30–35.
Curtis, Cathy. “Computer Art’s Not So Nerdy Anymore.” Los 
Angeles Times , February 20, 1989. Accessed March 12, 2013. 
http://articles.latimes.com/1989–02–20/entertainment/ca-230_1_
computer-art .
d’ Arcais, Francesco. “Evolution of the Influences between Science and 
Art.” Impact of Science on Society  24, no. 1 (1974): 31–40.
Daniels, Dieter. “Art and Media.” In The Age of Modernism: Art in the 
20th Century . Edited by C.M.Joachimides and N.Rosenthal. New 
York: DAP Publishers, 1997.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 308
Davis, Douglas. Art and the Future: A History/Prophecy of the 
Collaboration between Science, Technology and Art . London: Thames 
and Hudson, 1973.
Davis, Phillip J. and Rueben Hersh. The Mathematical Experience . 
Boston: Birkhauser, 1980.
———. Descartes’ Dream: The World According to Mathematics . Sussex: 
The Harvester Press, 1986.
Davy, Charles. Towards a Third Culture . London: Faber and Faber, 1961.
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker . London: Longmans, 1986.
De Witt, Tom. “Dataism: Aesthetic Premise of Computer Art.” Leonardo  
Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 57–61.
Denny, Don. “Geometric Art and Romantic Vision.” Aesthetics and Art 
Criticism  29, no. 2 (1970): 175–180.
Dietrich, Frank. “Visual Intelligence: The First Decade of Computer Art 
(1965–1975).” Leonardo  19, no. 2 (1986): 159–169.
Draper, Bob. “Computer Art.” New Scientist  (December 1974): 830–831.
Duin, Ed. “Comments on Art and Technology in Public Places.” Leonardo  
19, no. 4 (1986): 355.
Eco, Umberto. Arte Programmata: Arte Cinetica, Opera Moltiplicate, 
Opera Aperta . Exhibition catalog. Milan: Galleria Vittorio Emanuele, 
1962.
Efland, Arthur. “An Interview with Charles Csuri.” In Cybernetic 
Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts . Edited by Jasia Reichardt. 
New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1968.
Elkins, James. “Art History and Images that Are Not Art.” The Art 
Bulletin  77, no. 4 (1995): 553–571.
Ellul, Jacques. The Technological Society . Translated by J. Wilkinson 
New York: Vintage, 1964.
Em, David. The Art of David Em . New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1988.
Emmer, Michele, ed. The Visual Mind: Art and Mathematics . Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, 1993.
Ensmenger, Nathan. “Making Programming Masculine.” In Gender 
Codes: Why Women Are Leaving Computing . Edited by Thomas J. 
Misa. Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley, 2010.
Fabiman, Clifton, ed. Fantasia Mathematica . New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1958.
———, ed. The Mathematical Magpie . New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1962.
Fabis, Annateresa. “Waldemar Cordeiro: Computer Art 
Pioneer.” Leonardo  30, no. 1 (1997): 27–31.
Fer, Briony. On Abstract Art . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997.
Finke, Walter W. “Information: Dilemma If Deliverance.” Computers and 
Automation  15 (August 1966): 22–25.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 309
Flynt, Henry. “Essay: Concept Art.” In An Anthology . Edited by La Monte 
Young and Jackson Mac Low. New York: H. Friedrich, 1963.
Folger, Tim. “Art for Science’s Sake.” Discover  12, no. 10 (1991): 18–21.
Franke, Herbert W. “Computers and Visual Art.” Leonardo  4, no. 4 
(1971): 331–338.
———. Computer Graphics—Computer Art . Translated by G. Metzger 
New York: Phaidon, 1971.
———. “Some Remarks on Visual Fine Art in the Age of Advanced 
Technology.” Leonardo  8, no. 2 (1975): 153–154.
———. “A Cybernetic Approach to Aesthetics.” Leonardo  10, no. 3 
(1977): 203–206.
———. Computer Graphics—Computer Art . 2nd ed. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1985.
———. “Refractions of Science into Art.” In The Beauty of Fractals: 
Images of Complex Dynamical Systems . Edited by Heinz-Otto Peitgen 
and P H. Richter. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1986.
———. “The Expanding Medium: The Future of Computer 
Art.” Leonardo  20, no. 4 (1987): 335–338.
———. “Mathematics as an Artistic-Generative Principle.” Leonardo  
Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 25–26.
Funkhouser, C T. Prehistoric Digital Poetry: An Archaeology of Forms, 
1959–1995 . Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2007.
Gabor, Dennis. “Technological Civilization and Man’s Future.” In 
Cybernetics, Art and Ideas . Edited by Jasia Reichardt. London: Studio 
Vista, 1971.
Gere, Charlie. Digital Culture . London: Reaktion Books, 2002.
Gibson, William. Neuromancer . New York: Ace Books, 1984.
Gips, J. Shape Grammars and Their Uses: Artificial Perception, Shape 
Generation and Computer Aesthetics . Birkhauser: Vergal Basel, 1975.
Gips, J. and G. Stiny. “An Investigation of Algorithmic 
Aesthetics.” Leonardo  8, 1975: 213–220.
———. Algorithmic Aesthetics: Computer Models for Criticism and 
Design in the Arts . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978.
Gips, Terry. “Computer and Art: Issues of Content.” Art Journal  49, no. 3 
(Fall 1990): 229–232.
———. “Critical Questions for Computer Artists of the 1990s.” NCGA 
Conference Proceedings , Vol II . Arlington, VA: National Computer 
Graphics Association, 1990.
Gleick, James. Chaos: Making of a New Science . London: Cardinal, 1987.
Glueck, Grace. Video Comes into Its Own at the Whitney Biennial. 
New York Times , April 23, 1983.
———. Portrait of the Artist as a Young Computer. New York Times , 
February 20, 1983.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 310
Goodman, Cynthia. Digital Visions: Computers and Art . New York: 
Times Mirror Books, 1987.
Grant-Ryan, Pamela. “Why Leonardo? Past, Present and 
Future.” Leonardo  20, no. 4 (1987): 397–399.
Grau, Oliver, ed. Media Art Histories . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 
2007.
Greenfield, Gary R. “The Next Computer Art.” Leonardo  32, no. 4 
(1999): 339–343.
Habermas, Jürgen. “Modernity: An Incomplete Project.” In Postmodern 
Culture . Edited by Hal Foster. London: Pluto Press, 1983.
Harmon, Leon and Kenneth Knowlton. “Picture Processing by 
Computer.” Science  163 (April 1969): 19–29.
Harris, Jonathan. The New Art History: A Critical Introduction . London: 
Routledge, 2001.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Chaos Bound: Orderly Disorder in Contemporary 
Literature and Science . Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990.
Hays, Nancy. “An Artist Thanks to the Medium.” IEEE Computer 
Graphics & Applications  (September 1994): 4–7.
———, ed. Chaos and Order: Complex Dynamics in Literature and 
Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Hertlein, Grace. “An Artist Views Discovery through Computer-Aided 
Graphics.” Computers and Automation  (August 1970): 25–26.
———. “Computer Art: The Search beyond Manipulation.” Computers 
and Automation  22 (November 1973): 18–31.
———. “Computers, Technology, and the Arts.” Computers and People  
(August 1974): 6.
———. “Thirty Reactions to Computer Art.” Computers and People  
(August 1974): 6.
———. “Twelfth Annual Computer Art Exposition.” Computers and 
People  8 (August 1974): 4–30.
———. “A Defense of Computer Art and Graphics.” Computers and 
People  (August 1975): 6.
———. “Thirteenth Annual Computer Art Exposition.” Computers and 
People  (August 1975): 8–25.
———. “Computer Art: Review, 1968; Survey, 1978; Predictions, 
1988.” Computers and People  (August–September 1978): 8–9.
Hickman, Craig. “Why Artists Should Program.” Leonardo  24, no. 1 
(1991): 49–51.
Hiller Jr, Lejaren A. “Computer Music.” In Cybernetic Serendipity: The 
Computer and the Arts . Edited by Jasia Reichardt. New York: Praeger, 
1969.
Hoffman, Katherine. Explorations: The Visual Arts since 1945 . New 
York: HarperCollins, 1991.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 311
Hofstadter, Douglas R. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid . 
New York: Basic Books, 1979.
Horgan, John. The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the 
Twilight of the Scientific Age . New York: Broadway Books, 1996.
Hubbard, John H. The Beauty and Complexity of Mandelbrot Sets . Video 
recording, Gary Welz (Director). Science Television Company, New 
York, NY 1989.
Jameson, Frederic. “Postmodernism and Consumer Society.” In 
Postmodern Culture . Edited by Hal Foster. London: Pluto Press, 1985.
Jamison, Andrew and Ron Eyerman. Seeds of the Sixties . University of 
California Press: Berkeley, 1994.
John, Canaday. “Less Art, More Computer, Please.” New York Times  
(August 30, 1970).
Johnson, Ken. “Art in Review; Wade Guyton and Kelley Walker.” New 
York Times  (March 18, 2005).
Jones, Beverly. “Computer Imagery: Imitation and Representation of 
Realities.” Leonardo  Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1990): 31–38.
Jones, Caroline, and Peter Galison, ed. Picturing Science Producing Art . 
London: Routledge, 1998.
Kahn, Douglas. “Between a Bach and a Bard Place: Productive Constraint 
in Early Computer Arts.” In Media Art Histories . Edited by Oliver 
Grau. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2007.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Judgement . Translated by J. C. Meredith 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952.
Katzir-Katchalsky, Aharon. “Reflections on Art and Science.” Leonardo  5, 
no. 3 (1972): 249–253.
Kawano, Hiroshi. “What Is Computer Art?” In Artist and Computer . 
Edited by Ruth Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Keiner, Marion. “Manfred Mohr’s Abstract Aesthetic.” In Manfred Mohr , 
ed. Marion Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai Nadin. Zurich: Waser 
Verlag, 1994.
Kenton, Musgrave F. “Brief Introduction to the Online Gallery.” Accessed 
June 11, 2003. http://www.kenmusgrave.com/gallery_intro.html.
———. “Formal Logic and Self-Expression.” Accessed June 11, 2003
Kepes, György, ed. The New Landscape in Art and Science . Chicago: Paul 
Theobald and Co., 1956.
———. “The New Landscape.” In The New Landscape in Art and Science . 
Edited by György Kepes. Chicago: Paul Theobald and Co., 1956.
———. “The Visual Arts and the Sciences: A Proposal for Collaboration.” 
In Science and Culture . Edited by G. Holton. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Company, 1965.
King, Mike. “Computer and Modern Art: Digital Art Museum.” In 
Creativity and Cognition 2002: Proceedings of the 4th Creativity and 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 312
Cognition Conference . Edited by Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds. 
Loughborough University, UK and New York: ACM. 2002, 88–94.
Knowlton, Kenneth. “Collaborations with Artists: A Programmer’s 
Reflection.” In Graphic Languages: Proceedings of the IFIP Working 
Conference on Graphics Languages . Edited by F. Nake and A. 
Rosenfeld. London: North Holland Publishing, 1972, 399–418.
———. “Computer Art: Hardware and Software vs. Aesthetics.” 
In Proceedings of the Seventh National Sculpture Conference , 
coordinators: Colette and Charles Jeffery Bangert, University of 
Kansas Press, April, 1972.
———. “Why It Isn’t Art Yet.” SIGGRAPH 1986 Electronic Art and 
Animation Catalog . New York: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1986.
———. “Computer Graphics Pioneers: On Frustrations of Collaborating 
with Artists.” Computer Graphics  35, no. 3 (August 2001): 22–24.
Knuth, Donald Ervin. The Art of Computer Programming . Reading,  
MA: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1968.
Kozloff, Max. “The Multimillion Dollar Art Boondoggle.” Artforum  
(October 1971): 72–76.
Krauss, Rosalind. “Sculpture in the Expanded Field.” In Postmodern 
Culture . Edited by Hal Foster. London: Pluto, 1985.
———. The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths . 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1985.
Kurtz, Thomas. “The Courage of One’s Convictions.” In Manfred Mohr , 
ed. Marion Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai Nadin. Zurich: Waser 
Verlag, 1994.
Kuspit, Donald B. “Sol LeWitt: The Look of Thought.” Art in America  
(September/October 1975): 43–49.
Lambert, Nicholas. “A Critical Examination of ‘Computer Art’: Its 
History and Application.” PhD diss., University of Oxford, 2003. 
Accessed July 20, 2013. http://thesis.lambertsblog.co.uk/.
Laposky, Ben F. Electronic Abstraction: A New Approach to Design , 
Exhibition catalog. Sanford Museum, Cherokee, Iowa. 1953.
———. “Oscillons: Electronic Abstractions.” Leonardo  2, no. 4 (October 
1969): 345–354.
Leavitt, Ruth. Artist and Computer . New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Lee, R.S. “The Computer’s Public Image.” In The Computer Impact . 
Edited by Irene Taviss. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Leiber, Fritz. The Silver Eggheads . New York: Ballantine Books, 1961.
Levy, Steven. Artificial Life . New York: Pantheon, 1992.
LeWitt, Sol. “Paragraphs on Conceptual Art.” Art Forum  5, no. 10 (1967): 
79–83.
———. “Sentences on Conceptual Art.” Art-Language  1, no. 1 (1969): 
11–13.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 313
Liese, Rolf. “Welcome Address.” In Images Digital: Computer Artists in 
Germany 1986 . Edited by AlexKempkens and Barbara Kempkens. 
Munich: Barke, 1986.
Linker, Kate. “A Reflection on Post-Modernism.” Art Forum  24, 
(September 1985): 104–5.
Loewengart, Karen. Computer Genesis: A Vision of the 70s . Exhibition 
catalog. New York: Joe and Emily Lowe Art Gallery, 1977.
Lopes, Dominic McIver. A Philosophy of Computer Art . London: 
Routledge, 2010.
Loscerbo, John. Being and Technology: A Study in the Philosophy of 
Martin Heidegger . Boston: The Hague, 1981.
Lovejoy, Margot. Postmodernist Currents: Art and Artists in the Age of 
Electronic Media . Michigan: Ann Ardor, 1989.
———. “Art, Technology and Postmodernism: Paradigms, Parallels, and 
Paradoxes.” Art Journal  49, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 257–265.
Lucas, Richard. “Evolving Aesthetic Criteria for Computer Generated 
Art: A Delphi Study.” Masters of Arts diss., The Ohio State University, 
1986.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on 
Knowledge . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984.
———. The Inhuman: Reflections on Time . Cambridge: Polity Press, 
1991.
Malina, Frank J. “Aims and Scope of Leonardo.” Leonardo  1 (1968):  
1–2.
———. “Comments on Visual Fine Art Produced by Digital 
Computers.” Leonardo  4, no. 3 (1971): 263–265.
Malina, Roger F. “Computer Art in the Context of the Journal 
Leonardo .”Leonardo  Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 67–70.
———. “Digital Image—Digital Cinema: The Work of Art in the Age of 
Post-Mechanical Reproduction.” Leonardo  Supplemental Issue vol. 3 
(1990): 33–38.
Mallary, Robert. “Computer Sculpture: Six Levels of Cybernetics.” Artforum  
7 (May 1969): 29–35.
———. “Robert Mallary.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by Ruth 
Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Malloy, Judy, ed. Women, Art & Technology . Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, 2003.
Mandelbrot, Benoît. “Fractals and the Rebirth of Iteration Theory.” 
In The Beauty of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems . 
Edited by Heinz-Otto Peitgen and P. H. Richter. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1986.
———. “Fractal and an Art for the Sake of Science.” Leonardo  Supplemental 
Issue vol. 2 (1989): 21–24.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 314
Manovich, Lev. “The Death of Computer Art.” The Net Net Blog. 
Accessed February 16, 2004. http://www.thenetnet.com/schmeb/
schmeb12.html .
Marchand, Philip. Marshall McLuhan: The Medium and the Messenger . 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998.
Marcus, Arron. “Arron Marcus.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by Ruth 
Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Marcuse, Herbert. One-Dimensional Man . Boston: Beacon Press, 1964.
Maxwell, Delle. “The Emperor’s New Art?” In Computers in Art and 
Design . Edited by Isaac V. Kerlow. Las Vegas: ACM, 1991.
McCorduck, Pamela. Aaron’s Code: Meta-Art, Artificial Intelligence, and 
the Work of Harold Cohen . New York: W. H. Freeman, 1991.
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media . New York: McGraw Hill, 
1964.
Metzger, Gustav. “Untitled.” In A Little-Known Story about a Movement, 
a Magazine, and the Computer’s Arrival in Art: New Tendencies and 
Bit International, 1961–1973 . Edited by Margit Rosen. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, 2011.
Mezei, Leslie. “Artistic Design by Computer.” Computers and Automation  
13, no. 8 (1964): 12–15.
———. “Leslie Mezei.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by Ruth Leavitt. 
New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Michie, Donald and Rory Johnston. The Creative Computer: Machine 
Intelligence and Human Knowledge . Harmondsworth: Viking, 1984.
Mohr, Manfred. “Manfred Mohr.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by 
Ruth Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
———. Manfred Mohr . Edited by Marion Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and 
Mihai Nadin. Zurich: Waser Verlag, 1994.
———. Artist’s Statement , 2000 . The Rave Webmuseum’s Spotlight 
Gallery, Manfred Mohr Retrospective Exhibition. Accessed July 15, 
2013. http://www.emohr.com/ww2_out.html .
Moles, Abraham A. Information Theory and Esthetic Perception . Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1966.
Molnar, Vera. “Towards Aesthetic Guidelines for Paintings with the Aid of 
a Computer.” Leonardo  8, no. 3 (1975): 185–189.
———. “Vera Molnar.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by Ruth Leavitt. 
New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Morgan, Robert C. Art into Ideas: Essays on Conceptual Art . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Morris, John. “How to Write Poems with a Computer.” Michigan 
Quarterly Review  6, no.1 (Winter 1967): 17–20.
Mueller, Robert E. The Science of Art: The Cybernetics of Creative 
Communication . London: Rapp & Whiting, 1967.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 315
———. “Idols of Computer Art.” Art in America  (May/June 1972): 68–73.
———. “When Is Computer Art Art?” Creative Computing  9, no. 1 
(1983): 136–144.
———. “The Leonardo Paradox: Imagining the Ultimate Creative 
Computer.” Leonardo  23, no. 4 (1990): 427–430.
Mumford, Lewis. Art & Technics . New York: Columbia University Press, 
1952.
Musgrave F. Kenton,.“Natura Ex Machina.” IEEE Computer Graphics & 
Applications  (January 1989): 4–7.
Nadin, Mihai. “The Aesthetic Challenge of the Impossible.” In Images 
Digital: Computer Artists in Germany 1986 . Edited by AlexKempkens 
and Barbara Kempkens. Munich: Barke Verlag, 1986.
———. “Emergent Aesthetics-Aesthetic Issues in Computer 
Art.” Leonardo  Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 43–48.
———. “Alea Iacta Est.” In Manfred Mohr . Zurich: Waser Verlag, 1994.
Nake, Frieder. “There Should Be No Computer Art.” PAGE: Computer Art 
Society Bulletin . Edited by Marion Keiner, Thomas Kurtz, and Mihai 
Nadin, 18 (October 1971): 18–19.
———. Ästhetik als Informationsverarbeitung . Wien. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1974.
———. “Personal Recollections of a Distant Beginning.” In Explorations 
in Art and Technology . Edited by Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds. 
London: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
Neal, Margaret. “More Than Science More Than Art.” IEEE Computer 
Graphics & Applications  (November 1988): 3–5.
Nees, Georg. “Programming Stochastic Computer Graphics.” In 
Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and Art . Edited by Jasia 
Reichardt. New York: Praeger, 1968.
Negroponte, Nicolas. “The Return of the Sunday Painter.” In The 
Computer Age: A Twenty-Year View . Edited by Michael L. Dertouzos 
and Joel Moses. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1979.
Noll, A Michael. “Patterns by 7090.” Bell Telephone Laboratories, 
Incorporated, Technical Memorandum  (August 28, 1962).
———. “Human or Machine: A Subjective Comparison of Piet 
Mondrian’s ‘Composition with Lines’ (1917) and a Computer-
Generated Picture.” The Psychological Record  16, 1966: 1–10.
———. “The Digital Computer as a Creative Medium.” IEEE Spectrum  4, 
no. 10 (1967): 89–95.
———. “Art Ex Machina.” IEEE Student Journal  8, no. 4 (September 
1970): 10–14.
———. “Computers and the Visual Arts: A Retrospective View.” 
SIGGRAPH Art Show Catalog . Edited by Elaine Sonderegger. Boston, 
MA: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1982.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 316
———. “The Beginnings of Computer Art in the United States: A 
Memoir.” Leonardo  27, no. 1 (1991): 39–44.
Palyka, Duane M. “Computer Painting.” In Artist and Computer . Edited 
by Ruth Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Peitgen, Heinz-Otto and P. H. Richter. The Beauty of Fractals: Images of 
Complex Dynamical Systems . New York: Springer-Verlag, 1986.
Pickover, Clifford, ed. Computers, Pattern, Chaos and Beauty: Graphics 
from an Unseen World . London: Alan Sutton, 1990.
———, ed. Visions of the Future: Art, Technology and Computing in the 
21st Century . New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.
Pierce, John R. Symbols, Signals, and Noise: The Nature and Process of 
Communication . New York: Harper, 1961.
———. “Portrait of the Machine as a Young Artist.” Playboy  12, no. 6 
(June 1965): 124, 150, 182, 184.
Popper, Frank. “Technoscience Art: The Next Step.” Leonardo  20, no. 4 
(1987): 301–3.
———. “The Place of High-Technology Art in the Contemporary Art 
Scene.” Leonardo  26, no. 1 (1993): 65–69.
———. Art of the Electronic Age . London: Thames & Hudson Ltd.,  
1993.
Preston, Stuart. “Art Ex Machina.” New York Times  (April 18, 1965).
Preusser, Robert. “Revitalizing Art and Humanizing Technology.” Impact 
of Science on Society . 24, no. 1 (1974): 53–67.
Prince, Patric. “Digital Art: The New Literacy, a Personal View of the 
Evolution of Art Issues.” Computer Graphics  29, no. 4 (November 
1995): 30.
———. “The Art of Understanding: Or a Primer on Why We Study 
History.” SIGGRAPH Art Show Catalog  (2003). Accessed July 20, 
2013. http://www.siggraph.org/artdesign/gallery/S03/essays/prince.pdf .
Prueitt, Melvin. Art and the Computer . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
Rajchman, John. “The Postmodern Museum.” Art in America  (October 
1985): 111–117.
Reichardt, Jasia, ed. Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and Art . New 
York: Praeger, 1968.
———. “Computer Art.” In Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and 
Art. Edited by Jasia Reichardt. New York: Praeger, 1968.
———, ed. Cybernetics, Art and Ideas . London: Studio Vista, 1971.
———, ed. The Computer in Art . London: Studio Vista Limited, 1971.
———. “Twenty Years of Symbiosis between Art and Science.” Impact of 
Science on Society  24, no. 1 (1974): 41–51.
Resch, Mark. “Editorial: Computers, Art and Context.” Leonardo  
Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 2.
Rivlin, Robert. The Algorithmic Image: Graphic Visions of the Computer 
Age. Redmond, Wash: Microsoft, 1986.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 317
Rockman, Arnold and Leslie Mezei. “The Electronic Computer as an 
Artist.” Canadian Art  11, (1964): 365–367.
Roh, Franz. Photo-Eye . London: Thames & Hudson, 1974.
Rorimer, Anne. New Art in the 60s and 70s Redefining Reality . London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2004.
Rosebush, Judson. “The Proceduralist Manifesto.” Leonardo  Supplemental 
Issue vol. 2 (1989): 55–56.
Rosen, Margit, ed. A Little-Known Story about a Movement, a 
Magazine, and the Computer’s Arrival in Art: New Tendencies and Bit 
International, 1961–1973 . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2011.
———. “Editorial.” In A Little-Known Story about a Movement, a 
Magazine, and the Computer’s Arrival in Art: New Tendencies and Bit 
International, 1961–1973 . Edited by Margit Rosen. Cambridge MA: 
The MIT Press, 2011.
Roszak, Theodore. The Cult of Information: The Folklore of Computers 
and the True Art of Thinking . New York: Pantheon Books, 1986.
Roth, Moira. “Harold Cohen on Art & the Machine.” Art in America  
(September/October 1978): 106–110.
Rush, Michael. New Media in the Late 20th Century Art . London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1999.
Schapiro, Meyer. Modern Art: 19th & 20th Centuries, Selected Papers . 
New York: Braziller, 1978.
Schillinger, Joseph. The Mathematical Basis of the Arts . New York: Da 
Capo Press, 1948.
Schwartz, Elliott. Electronic Music: A Listener’s Guide . New York: 
Praeger, 1973.
Schwartz, Lillian. “The Technology of Each Era.” Computers and People  
(August–September 1978): 19.
——— with Laurens Schwartz. The Computer Artist’s Handbook: 
Concepts, Techniques, and Applications . New York: W. W. Norton & 
Company, 1992.
Shaffer, Elinor, ed. The Third Culture: Literature and Science, European 
Cultures . Berlin and New York: De Gruyter, 1998.
Shanken, Edward. “Gemini Rising, Moon in Apollo: Attitudes on the 
Relationship between Art and Technology in the U.S., 1966–1971.” 
Leonardo Electronic Almanac  6, no. 12 (1999). Accessed July 19, 
2013. http://mitpress.mit.edu/e-journals/LEA/ARTICLES/gemini.html .
———. “Art in the Information Age: Technology and Conceptual 
Art.” Leonardo  35, no. 4 (2002): 433–438.
———. “Historicizing Art and Technology: Forging a Method and Firing 
a Canon” In Media Art Histories . Edited by Oliver Grau. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, 2007.
———. Art and Electronic Media . London: Phaidon Press, 2009.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 318
Shapin, Steven. The Scientific Revolution . Chicago: University of Chicago, 
1996.
Shearer, Rhonda. “Chaos Theory and Fractal Geometry: Their Potential 
Impact on the Future of Art.” Leonardo  25, no. 2 (1992): 143–152.
Sim, Stuart. Jean François Lyotard . London: Prentice Hall, 1996.
———. Irony and Crisis: A Critical History of Postmodern Culture . 
London: Icon Books, 2002.
Smith, Brian R. “Beyond Computer Art.” Leonardo  Supplemental Issue 
vol. 2 (1989): 39–41.
Smith, Stuart. “The Computer May Turn Us All into Artists.” Computers 
and People  8 (1974): 28–30.
Snow, C. P. The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1959.
Solomon-Godeau, Abigail. “Photography after Art Photography.” In Art 
after Modernism . Edited by Brian Wallis. Boston: D.R. Godine, 1984.
Spalter, Anne M. The Computer in the Visual Arts . Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1999.
Spencer, Dorothy. “Computer Art: An Oxymoron? Views from the 
Mainstream.” In SIGGRAPH 89 Panel Proceedings . Edited by Robert 
L. Judd, 23, no. 5. New York: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1989, 211–221.
Stephan, Gary. “Escher or Newman: Who Puts the Ghost in the 
Machine.” Art Forum  21 (February 1983): 64–67.
Sumner, Lloyd. Computer Art and Human Response . Charlottesville, 
Virginia: Paul B. Victorius, 1968.
———. The Long Ride . Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 1978.
Talbot, William HenryFox. The Pencil of Nature . London: Longman, 
Brown, Green, & Longmans, 1844.
Tamblyn, Christine. “Computer Art as Conceptual Art.” Art Journal  49, 
no. 3 (Fall 1990): 253–256.
Taviss, Irene, ed. The Computer Impact . New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Taylor, Grant D. “Routing Mondrian: The A. Michael Noll Experiment.” 
Media-N . 8, no. 2 (Fall 2012): 11–17.
———. “The Soulless Usurper: Reception and Criticism of Early 
Computer Art.” In Mainframe Experimentalism: Early Computing and 
the Foundations of the Digital Arts . Edited by Hannah Higgins and 
Douglas Kahn. Berkeley: The University of California Press, 2012.
———. “Linearity and the Algorithmic Search.” In The American 
Algorists: Linear Sublime . Edited by Barbara McNulty, Exhibition 
catalog, Annville, PA: Suzanne H. Arnold Art Gallery, Lebanon Valley 
College, 2013.
———. “Up for Grabs: Agency, Praxis, and the Politics of Early Digital 
Art.” In Lateral . Edited by Katherine Behar and Silvia Ruzanka  
(Spring 2013). Accessed July 20, 2013. http://lateral.
culturalstudiesassociation.org/issue2/theory/taylor/index.html .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 319
Thompson, D ’ArcyWentworth. On Growth and Form . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1917.
Todd, Stephen and William Latham. Evolutionary Art and Computers . 
London: Academic Press, 1992.
Toffler, Alvin. Future Shock . New York: Random House, 1970.
Truckenbrod, Joan. Creative Computer Imaging . New Jersey: Prentice 
Hall, Inc, 1988.
Tsuchiya, Haruki, Masao Komura, Kunio Yamanaka, Junichiro Kakizaki, 
Makoto Ohtake, Koji Fujino, et al. “Computer Technique Group from 
Japan.” In Cybernetic Serendipity: The Computer and the Arts . Edited 
by Jasia Reichardt. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1968.
Tsuchiya, Haruki. “The Philosophy of Computer Art.” Computers and 
Automation  (September 1969): 18.
Turing, Alan Mathison. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind: 
A Quarterly Review of Psychology and Philosophy , 59, no. 236 
(1950): 433–460.
Turkle, Sherry. The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit . New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1984.
———. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet . New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1995.
Venn, John. The Logic of Chance . London: Macmillan, 1866.
Vergine, Lea. Art on the Cutting Edge: A Guide to Contemporary 
Movements . Milan, Italy: Skira, 1996.
Verostko, Roman. “Algorithms and the Artist.” Paper presented at the 
Fourth International Symposium on Electronic Art, Helsinki, 1994. 
Accessed April 20, 2012. http://www.verostko.com/alg-isea94.html .
———. “Algorithmic Art: Composing the Score for Visual Art.” Accessed 
July 20, 2013. http://www.verostko.com/algorithm.html .
———. “Epigenetic Painting: Software as Genotype, a New Dimension of 
Art.” Leonardo  23, no. 1 (1990): 17–23.
Wallis, Brian ed. Art after Modernism: Essays on Rethinking 
Representation . New York: New Museum of Contemporary Art, 1984.
Wands, Bruce. Art of the Digital Age . New York: Thames & Hudson, 
2006.
Weibel, Peter. “Ars Electronica: An Interview by Johan Pijnappel.” Art & 
Design Profile  39 (1994): 27–31.
———. “Digital Art: Intrusion or Inclusion?” In A Little-Known Story 
about a Movement, a Magazine, and the Computer’s Arrival in Art: 
New Tendencies and Bit International, 1961–1973 . Edited by Margit 
Rosen. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2011.
Whitelaw, Michael. “Tom Ray’s Hammer: Emergence and Excess in a-Life 
Art.” Leonardo  31, no. 5 (1998): 377–381.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1948.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 320
Wilson, Mark. Drawing with Computers: The Artist’s Guide to Computer 
Graphics . New York: Perigee Books, 1985.
Withington, Frederic G. The Real Computer: Its Influence, Uses, and 
Effects . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1969.
Woodward, K. ed. The Myths of Information: Technology and 
Postindustrial Culture . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
Wright, Richard. “The Image in Art and ‘Computer Art’.” Leonardo  
Supplemental Issue vol. 2 (1989): 49–53.
Young, Jeffery. Forbes: Greatest Technological Stories . New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998.
Youngblood, Gene. “A Medium Matures: The Myth of Computer Art.” 
In 1983 SIGGRAPH, Exhibition of Computer Art Catalog . Edited by 
Copper Giloth. Detroit, MI: SIGGRAPH, ACM, 1983.
Zajec, Edward. “Edward Zajec.” In Artist and Computer . Edited by Ruth 
Leavitt. New York: Harmony Books, 1976.
Zajec, Edward and Matjaz Hmeljak. “Computer Art: the Embryonic 
Stages of a New Art.” Computers and People  (August–September 
1978): 25.
Art After Modernism  (1984) 215
Art and Science  166
Art and Technology movement 
12, 14, 19, 43, 45, 52, 104, 
105, 106, 108, 109, 110, 
153, 251
cultural unity 45
graphics industry 112
humanizing technology 45
Art and the Computer  (1984)  
160, 177
Art Bulletin  110
Art Com  153
art computer 84
art critics 4
art criticism 3, 4, 209
Art Forum  110
art galleries, United States 43
Corcoran Gallery 43
Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art 43
Museum of Modern Art 43
Walker Art Center 43
art historians 4
art history 11, 12, 110, 209, 243
Art in America  6, 110, 128, 144
Art Institute of Chicago 134
Art into Ideas  86
Art Journal  204, 205
art movements 12, 249
Art of Computer Programming, 
The 142
Art of the Electronic Age  (1993) 
7, 46, 253AARON 127, 130–2, 237
abstract sciences 17–18, 66, 69, 
81, 82
computer art 81
abstract transformation 100
Adrian, Marc 94, 214
Aesthetica  (1965) 88
Aesthetic Measure  (1933) 87
aesthetic objects 67
aesthetic value 66, 67
Albers, Josef 109
aleatoric moments 94
Alexander, Alberro 274
algorists 24, 115, 140, 170, 247, 
252, 256
algorithmic-based art 23, 252, 256
al-Khwarizmi, Muhammad 252
Allen, Rebecca 179, 197
American Abstract Artists 139
AMG 145
Amiga system 190
analog mechanical instruments 66
analogue waveforms 67
animation systems 113
Anne and Michael Spalter Digital 
Art Collection, United 
States 8
Antin, David 153, 275, 288
Apter, Michael 125, 283
Armory Show of 1913 7
Arnheim, Rudolf 195, 293
Arp, Hans 91
Ars Electronica 179, 232, 
233, 254INDEX
INDEX 322
artificial art 88, 89
artificial intelligence 15–16, 78, 
127, 129, 208, 230
hard programming 134
Artistic Design by Computers 
(1964) 26, 87
artist-programmer 19
artomaton  83
Arts 110
artworks 83
abstract references 83
aesthetic 83
artistic analysis 83
elements 83
principles of design 83
Ascott, Roy 85, 225
asymmetrical motion 69
AT&T 31, 33
project 105
automata  132–4
Automatic Painting Machine No 
1 99
avant-garde 4, 13, 14, 20, 26, 51, 
63, 81, 105, 153, 158, 205, 
224, 259
artists 44, 45
computer art 52
critics 4
ideology 158
movements 52, 81
Ayer, Alfred 78
Azank, Roberto 166
Bacon, Francis 145
Ballistic Research Laboratories 
(BRL), United States  
Army 27
Ballo, Guido 46
Bangert, Charles and Collette, 
103, 115–16, 123–4, 126, 
141, 280, 284
Barrell, John 243
Barrow, John D. 148, 287Barry, Robert 274
Barthes, Roland 22, 208, 228
Basilica, Sacre-Coeur 97
Baudelaire, Charles 16
Baudrillard, Jean 21, 208, 228–30, 
233, 299
mass media culture 229
simulacra 228
Bauhaus 80
Beaman, Jeanne 5
Bell, Daniel 113
Bell, Stephen 252
Bell Telephone Laboratories 31, 
33, 112, 261
Benjamin, Walter 22, 208, 214, 
224, 226, 231, 297
reproductive technologies 214
Bennett, Daniel C. 301
Bense, Max 18, 87–9, 93, 126, 
128, 139, 152, 195, 257, 
270, 278
artificial art 88–9
computational aesthetics 88
computer art 88
generative art 139
theories 139
Benthall, Jonathan 4, 26, 107–8, 
118–19, 148, 235, 271, 281, 
283, 286, 287, 301
Berkeley, Edmund C. 27, 55, 145, 
286
Bettis Atomic Power Laboratory 29
Beyls, Peter 252
Beyond Modern Sculpture  85
Bild 1712/65  173
Bill, Max 109, 146, 287
Binkley, Timothy 132, 195, 208, 
215, 216, 227, 231, 250, 
293, 296, 297, 300, 302
common themes, computer art’s 
theoretical alignment 216
conceptualism 216
metadiscourse 216
INDEX 323
pluralism 216
simulation 216
biological metaphor 23, 237
biomorphs, graphic organisms 238
Birkhoff, George David 87, 88
Blessed State  170
Blind Watchmaker, The  (1986) 
238
Blinn, James F. 160
Bliss, Anna Campbell 302
Boeing 261
Borges, Jorge Luis 238, 240
Labyrinths  (1964) 238
brain workers 99
Bright Caven  161–2
British Computer Society 109
BRL see Ballistic Research 
Laboratories (BRL), United 
States Army
BRLESC 1 27
Brockman, John 273
Brown, Paul 6, 197, 204, 232, 
235, 269, 293, 295, 300, 
301
Burgin, Victor 209
Burlington Magazine  110
Burnham, Jack 4, 20, 38, 43, 45, 
85, 86, 104–6, 270, 272, 
273, 278, 280
Software  exhibition 45
Burroughs B5500 120
Burson, Nancy 245
Cage, John 44
Caillaud, Bernard 256
Calcomp (California Computer 
Products, Inc.) 29, 70, 261
Calcomp 565 120
Calcomp Plotter 29
Canaday, John 4, 6, 59, 70, 73, 
124, 145
canned art 251
Carnival  175Carpenter, Rhys 58, 275
Carrier, David 110, 203, 221,  
281, 294
Cartesian spatial logic 158
cathode ray oscilloscope 67
cell phones 1
Center for Advanced Visual 
Studies, MIT 40
Chadabe, Joel 5
Chagall, Marc 184
chaos culture 165
Chaos: Making of a New Science  
(1987) 162
chaos theory 162–3, 164,  
165, 166
Charter of Foundation  42
Chave, Alphonse 185
Chave, Pierre 185
choreography 5, 11
Christmas Wreath—Computer 
Style 70
Clark, T. J. 209, 243
Clarke, Arthur C., 56
Classical Era 170
Clothes Hangers  217
Coca-Cola 100
Cohen, Harold 125–32, 134, 
138–9, 193, 195, 210,  
292, 296
artificial intelligence 127
machine-generated art 131
robotic drawing system 132
see also  AARON
Cohen, John 105, 152,  
280, 288
College Art Association (CAA) 
meeting 201
Collingwood, Charles 55
combinatorics 77
Coming of the Post-Industrial 
Society, The  (1973) 113
complex disorders mapping 66
complex orders mapping 66
INDEX 324
Compro 30
computer 1, 21
artists 1
art-making process 1
dance 5
historical artifact 4
music creation 5
poetry 5
“Computer and Art: Issues of 
Content” 211
Computer and Artist  (1976) 115
computer art 1–24, 118, 267
acceptance 7–8
algorithmic 125
art critics 5
art historians 5
art movements 12
coded aesthetics 17–18
computer technology 10
critical impact 22–3
criticism 3–6
cultural domain 12–13
definition 2
exponents 11
frontier exploration 20–1
future crashes 13–14
gender issues 118
generativity 125
heuristic exploration 125
heuristic search 137–8
importance 267
pioneering phases (1960s and 
1970s) 5–10
postmodernism 23
technoscience themes 21
transition (1960s to 1980s) 
125
virtual renaissance 18–19
Computer Art and Human 
Response  (1968) 119
Computer Art as Conceptual  
Art 46
Computer Art Contest of 1963 27“Computer Art in Context” 217
“Computer Art: Its Prospects for 
the Future” 149
Computer Art Journal (CAJ)  256
computer art movement 35
Computer Art Society, London 1, 
211
Computer Composition with 
Lines  60
computer folk art 232
computer-generated animation 
13, 160
computer-generated art 249
computer-generated imagery 26, 
27, 28, 31, 32, 113
computer-generated images 66, 74
computer-generated music 13, 56
computer-generated visual art 13
Computer Graphic—Computer 
Art (1985) 152
computer graphics 27, 112, 166, 
170, 178
discipline 112
entertainment industry 112
fields 112
fractal geometry 167–8
impact 170
Computer Graphics—Computer 
Art (1971) 10, 110, 112
Computer Graphics—Une 
Esthétique Programmée  151
Computer in Art, The  (1971) 110, 
115
Computerkunst 254
computer metamorphosis 100
Computer-Picture-Book  135
computer programming 116
Computers and Automation  26–8, 
30–1, 60, 70, 115
competitions 30, 60
computer art 30–1
growth 30
international practitioners 30
INDEX 325
“Computer Sculpture: Six Levels 
of Cybernetics” 86
Computers and People  110, 150
Computer Technique Group 
(CTG) 98–9, 100, 101–2, 
107, 108
computer technology 10
Computing and Data Processing 
Society of Canada 26
Computing Machinery and 
Intelligence  (1950) 54–5, 90
computing practitioners 3
conceptual art 4, 12, 46–54, 65
algorithmic procedure 47
computer art 46–9, 53–4
cultural and historical  
context 52
mathematics 47
conceptual art movement 14
constructivism 46, 78–81, 224
New Tendency groups 81
visual aesthetic 79
constructivist movement 181
contemporary art 210, 251
conversational method 136
Conway, John 167, 235
copyright, computer art 193
Corcoran Gallery 43
Cordeiro, Waldemar 118, 231
Cornock, Stroud 283
Cotter, Holland 268
Cox, Donna 215, 220–1, 227–9, 
282, 297–9
photography 215
postmodernism 215
scientific visualization 220
Crimp, Douglas 209, 214, 227
Cronkite, Walter 55
Csuri, Charles 82, 94, 96–7,  
109, 113, 158, 197, 205, 
208, 232, 253, 270, 279, 
289, 300
computer graphics 96Hummingbird , computer 
artwork 109
CTG see Computer Technique 
Group (CTG)
Cubic Limit  141
cubic signs 141
Cult of Information, The  (1986) 
196
cultural convergence 41
cultural unification 103–4
cunei  183
Curtis, Cathy 203, 295
cybernetics 83, 84, 85, 86, 114, 
125, 162–3, 230
biological process 85
communication 85–6
control 85
cultural process 85
features 85
mechanical process 85
statistical mechanics 85
Cybernetics, Art and Ideas  (1971) 
115
Cybernetic Serendipity: The 
Computer and the Arts  29, 
43, 70, 85, 86, 88, 104, 108, 
110, 115, 119, 225, 261, 264
cybernetic theory 43–4
cyberpunk movements 263
cyberspace 157, 263
Daguerre, Louis 46
“Daisy Bell” song 56
Dame, Notre 97
Daniels, Dieter 11, 270
d’Arcais, Francesco 273
DARPA see Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA)
Darwin ’s Dangerous Idea   
(1996) 238
dataism 219
dataists 219–20
INDEX 326
dataplotter 27
David Carrier 110
Davis, Douglas 40, 42–3, 51, 104, 
273, 278, 280
Davis, Philip J. 75, 198, 269, 292
Davy, Charles 273
Dawkins, Richard 237–8, 240, 301
biomorphs 238
The Blind Watchmaker   
(1986) 238
Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) 37
artificial intelligence 37
Degenerate Art  exhibition  
of 1937 7
Delehanty, Suzanne 153
Deleuze, Gilles 228, 263
Delphi Procedure 205
Delphi Study  22
Dennett, Daniel 238
Darwin ’s Dangerous Idea  
(1996) 238
Denny, Don 50–1, 274
Derrida, Jacques 22, 208, 228
Design Space 238
Desk Set  54
desktop publishing 21
de Stijl Group 80
de Stijl movement 147
de Vaucanson, Jacques 133
De Witt, Tom 219, 298
Dietrich, Frank 78–9, 111, 158, 
205, 277, 281, 285, 289
digital abstraction 157
digital art 2, 211, 247, 253, 254, 
255–6
collections 8
Anne and Michael Spalter 
Digital Art Collection in 
United States 8
V&A in London 8
ZKM in Karlsruhe Germany 8
computer art 2–24history 9–10
market 8
digital photography 245
Digital Salon 248
digital technologies 9–11
Digital Visions  177
divination 91
Draper, Art 55
Draper, Bob 85, 280, 287
drawing machines 66
analog 70
Duchamp, Marcel 28
Duin, Ed 294
dynamic equilibrium 174
Earth 1  245
EAT see Experiments in Art and 
Technology (EAT)
Eco, Umberto 46, 90, 279
Edmonds, Ernest 271, 281, 283, 
302
EDVAC 27
Efland, Arthur 279, 289
Einstein, Carl 146
élan vital  75
electrical engineering 68
Electronic Abstractions  67
electronic art 211–12, 247
electronic brain 55
see also  mechanical brain
Electronic Computer as an Artist, 
The 25
Electronic Computer as Artist, The 
(1964) 58
electronic media 213–14
electronic technology 66
Electronic Visualization Lab 220
electronic waveforms 75
Elkins, James 4, 66, 277
Ellul, Jacques 15, 87, 228, 272
Em, David 157, 159, 160, 161, 
192, 199, 289
graphic rendering software 160
INDEX 327
Emerson, Peter Henry 121
Emmer, Michele 287
ENIAC 27, 37
Ensmenger, Nathan 116, 282
Environmental art 104
epigenesis 237
“Epigenetic Painting” 157
epigenetics 237
Ernst, Max 184
Escher, M. C. 147
European New Tendency 
movement 135
Evans, Brian 252
Evolutionism 239
Exhibition of Computer Art 116
Experiments in Art and 
Technology (EAT) 44, 
45–6, 105
avant-garde artists 45
Eyerman, Ron 37, 272
Fabiman, Clifton 275
Fabis, Annateresa 284
Feigenbaum, Edward 128–9
Fenster, Diane 233
Fer, Briony 147, 287
Fetter, William 27
Fibonacci numbers 76
Field, The  122–3
film 11
fine art 14–15
Fine Arts Forum 262
Finke, Walter W. 106, 280
Flax, Carol 245
Fluxus 104
Flynt, Henry 46, 274
Folger, Tim 298
Foster, Hal 209, 227
Foucault, Michel 22, 208, 228
fractal geometry 165, 166,  
167–8
Classical Era 170
Heroic Era 170impact, computer graphics 170
Romantic Era 170
Franco-German digital art 88
Franke, Herbert W. 4, 10, 18, 35, 
40–1, 67, 78, 169, 270, 272, 
273, 274, 276, 277, 278, 279, 
281, 282, 283, 287, 289, 291, 
292, 293, 297, 301, 304
computer art movement 35
frontier 158
Funkhouser, Christopher T. 5,  
268, 269
future crashes, computer art 13
Future Shock  (1970) 113
futurology, computer art 113–14, 
208
Gabor, Dennis 57, 275
Galerie Chave 184
Galison, Peter 273
Gates, Bill 265
Gaussian-Quadratic  32–4
copyright 33–4
generative aesthetics 88, 257
generative art 23, 256, 257
generative impulse 90
generative mathematics 242
Generative Systems program 134
geometric abstraction 12, 65, 112, 
122, 125, 181
geometrical patterns 71, 76
Slant One  79
geometric form 77
Gerbarg, Darcy 116
Gere, Charlie 8–9, 114, 254, 264, 
269, 270, 282, 289, 301, 
303, 304
Giant Brains or Machines That 
Think  (1949) 55
Gibson, William 263
Giloth, Copper 116, 217
Clothes Hangers  217
Gips, James 143, 257, 285, 286, 304
INDEX 328
Gips, Terry 211, 296
computer art 211–12
Gleick, James 162, 163, 289
Glueck, Grace 154, 194, 195,  
288, 293
“Portrait of the Artist As a 
Young Computer,” 194
Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal 
Golden Braid  (1979) 172
Golden Plotter Award 255
Goodman, Cynthia 116, 143, 177, 
271, 272, 286, 291, 294
Grant-Ryan, Pamela 221, 281, 
298
Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
186
graphic design 89, 112, 189, 217, 
218
graphic entities 140
graphic rendering software 160
Grau, Oliver 268, 270
GRAV see Groupe de Recherche 
d’Art Visuel (GRAV)
Greenberg, Clement 147
Greenbergian model 207
Greenfield, Gary R. 252, 303
Groupe de Recherche d’Art Visuel 
(GRAV) 42
group renaissance 42
Growth and Form  (1917) 72
Guattari, Félix 228, 264
GUI see Graphical User Interface 
(GUI)
Guyton, Wade 1
Habermas, Jürgen 223–4, 299
hackers 114–15
Haeckel, Ernst 67
HAL 9000 56
Happenings 104
Haraway, Donna 263
“hard” mastery 134
Haring, Keith 177Harmon, Leon 63, 96–7, 98,  
100, 279
harmonograph tracing  
machines 70
Harris, Jonathan 301
Hartung, Hans 88
Hayles, N. Katherine 164, 289
Hays, Nancy 300
heat death, universe 163
Hébert, Jean-Pierre 115, 180, 234, 
252
Vent Noir II  185
Hegelian modernist metaphor 223
Heroic Era 170
Hersh, Rueben 75, 198, 269, 277, 
292, 294
Hertlein, Grace 7, 109, 114–15, 
120, 122–3, 139, 269, 
281–3, 285, 287–8
Hewlett Packard 115
Hickman, Craig 303
Hiller Jr, Lejaren A. 5, 268
Hmeljak, Matjaz 285
Hockney, David 177
Hodos 175
Hoffman, Katherine 273
Hofstadter, Douglas R. 172
Holzer, Jenny 177, 246
Horgan, John 169, 290
Howard Wise Gallery 31, 47, 104
exhibition 31–4, 58
HP plotters 255
Hubbard, John H. 236, 301
Hudson River School 265
Hulten, K. G. Pontus 43
human behavior 85
Hummingbird  109
IBM 70, 261
reductionist paradigm 244
“Idol of the Kaleidoscope” 148
Idols of Computer Art 145
if-then-else  statement 128
INDEX 329
Illinois Institute of Technology 40
illusion technology 198
Imitation Game 59
see also  Turing Test
industrial design 21
information aesthetics 88
information theory 83, 84, 86, 88
aesthetics 88
physiology 84
Information Theory and Esthetic 
Perception  (1966) 86
Inhuman, The  (1991) 228
ink jet technology 255
input devices 21
Institute of Contemporary Art, 
Philadelphia 153, 203
Institute of Contemporary Arts, 
London 104
“Interaction of Art and Science, 
The” 149
International Symposium of 
Electronic Art (ISEA) 179, 
237
Internet 262, 263
Intuitively Yours  121
Involution  160
ISEA see International Symposium 
of Electronic Art (ISEA)
Jameson, Frederic 245, 299, 300, 
302
Jamison, Andrew 37, 272
Japanese computer art 99, 100, 
101, 102
Jarnagin, William Spencer 108
Jenkins, Larry 70
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
159–60
Jobs, Steve 265
John, Canaday 4, 6, 59, 70, 73–4, 
96, 102, 124–5, 145, 148–9, 
168, 261, 269, 276–7, 279, 
283, 286Johnson, Ken 268
Johnston, Rory 191–2, 202, 288, 
289, 291, 293, 294
Jones, Beverly 216, 297
disciplinary divisions 216
Jones, Caroline 273
Joyce, James 194
“Portrait of the Machine As a 
Young Artist” 194
joystick 21
JPL see Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL)
Judd, Donald 47
Julesz, Béla 31, 137
Kahn, Douglas 2, 7, 268, 269
Kandinsky, Wassily 173
Kant, Immanuel 18, 270, 276
Katzir-Katchalsky, Aharon 273
Kawaguchi, Yoichiro 199, 235–6, 
294, 301
Kawano, Hiroshi 83–4, 126, 205, 
278, 283
Keiner, Marion 274, 284, 285
Kennedy, John F. 100
Kenton, Musgrave F. 170–1, 234, 
290, 300, 303, 304
Kepes, György 40–1, 63, 66, 273, 
276
King, Augusta Ada 118
King, Mike 250, 302
Klee, Paul 59, 88, 237
organic idealism 237
Klüver, Billy 44
Knowlton, Kenneth 63, 96–8,  
100, 108, 150, 202,  
224, 279, 281, 288,  
294, 299
Knuth, Donald Ervin 142
Komura, Masao 102
Kozloff, Max 105, 280
Krauss, Rosalind 49, 51, 209, 224, 
227, 245–6, 274, 299, 302
INDEX 330
Kruger, Barbara 215, 227
Kubrick, Stanley 56
Kunst Licht Kunst  catalog 44
Kunst und Computer  94, 214
Kurtz, Thomas 139, 274, 284, 285
Kuspit, Donald B. 48–9, 274
Labyrinths  (1964) 238
Lambert, Nicholas 81, 198, 249, 
260, 269, 277, 294, 296, 
299, 301, 302, 304
landscape 19, 102, 122, 123, 125, 
160, 170, 181, 189, 198, 224, 
226, 248, 262, 265, 267
Lansdown, John 109
Laposky, Ben F. 67–70, 75, 90, 
138, 277
Electronic Abstractions  90
laptop 1
Large Landscape: Ochre and 
Black  123–4
laser printers 255
Latham, William 75, 238–41, 250, 
301
Leavitt, Ruth 103, 115–16, 150, 
278, 280, 281, 283, 284, 
285, 286, 288, 292
Lecci, Auro 79
Le déjeuner sur l’herbe  (1862–3) 3
Lee, R. S. 56, 275
Leiber, Fritz 275
Le Mouvement , in 1955 42
Leonardo  109, 110, 203, 219, 220
Leonardo da Vinci 103
Last Supper  188
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon  (1907) 3
Les Immatériaux  216, 222, 225
Levine, Les 177
Levine, Sherrie 227, 230
Levy, Steven 301
LeWitt, Sol 46–50, 53, 147, 274, 
275
Variations of Incomplete Open 
Cubes  48Wall Drawings  48
work vs. Mohr’s work, 
computer and conceptual 
art 53–4
Liese, Rolf 293
life science 66
light pen 21
Linker, Kate 225, 299
Lippard, Lucy 49
Lissajous, Jules 69
literature 11
Loewengart, Karen 144, 286
logic 65
logical positivism 77–8
Logic of Chance, The  91
Long Ride, The  (1978) 119
Lopes, Dominic McIver 2, 268
Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
New Mexico 235
Los Angeles County Museum of 
Art 43
Los Angeles Times  203
Loscerbo, John 299
Lovejoy, Margot 116, 118, 144, 
177, 213–15, 227, 229, 231, 
246, 250, 283, 286, 288, 
291, 296, 297, 300, 302
Lucas, Richard 22, 205–6, 212, 
231, 295, 300
Lyotard, Jean-François 22, 164, 
208, 210, 213, 216, 228–9, 
243, 263, 289, 299
Inhuman, The  (1991) 228
Postmodern Condition, The  
(1984) 228
MacDonald art 192
Machine: As Seen at the End of 
the Mechanical Age, The  43
machine creativity 59
machine-generated art 131
Macintosh paradigm 244
Mack, Heinz 42
Magnificent Machine, The  120
INDEX 331
Ma Jolie  33
Making of a Counter Culture,  
The 105
Malevich, Kazimir 146
Malina, Frank J. 103, 107, 110, 
149, 221, 281
Malina, Roger F. 192, 198, 202, 
210, 220–1, 232, 242, 294
Mallary, Robert 86, 137, 142
Mallen, George 109
Mandelbrot, Benoît 162, 165–70, 
242, 289, 290, 301
fractal geometry 165
Mandelbrot Set 165, 169
Manet, Édouard 3
“man versus  machine”  
paradigm 16
Manovich, Lev 251, 255, 303
Mapplethorpe, Robert 215
Marchand, Philip 272
Marcus, Arron 286
Marcuse, Herbert 15, 38, 106, 272
Marilyn Monroe 100
Mason, Catherine 70, 72, 270, 301
Mason, Maughan S. 70
mass art 231
Mathematical Basis of the Arts, 
The (1948) 70
mathematical Platonism 75
mathematical visualization 82
Mathews, Max 56
Matrix Multiplication Series 31  78
Maxwell, Delle 204, 250–1, 257, 
269, 275, 295, 303, 304
McCorduck, Pamela 129–30,  
284, 285
McCulloch, Warren 84
McLuhan, Marshall 15, 38, 44, 84, 
114, 154, 221, 230, 246, 272
mechanical abstraction 122
mechanical automatism 82
mechanical brain 55
see also  electronic brain
mechanical pendulums 69media art 2
see also  digital art
Media Lab 145
Mellen, Jennifer 177
Mestrovic, Matko 42
metaphysical frontier 157
Metzger, Gustav 13, 270, 272, 
277, 281, 289, 297, 304
Mezei, Leslie 25–7, 35, 40, 63, 87, 
107, 145, 148, 152, 271, 
278, 281, 286, 288
Michie, Donald 191–2, 202, 288, 
289, 291, 292, 293, 294
Michigan Quarterly Review  5
Microsoft 261
minimalist 4
MIT 112
modernism 17, 22–3, 41, 50–1, 
54, 58, 66, 78, 80–1, 
146–47, 174, 206–10, 213, 
219–20, 222, 227, 230–31, 
244–45, 259, 261
Moholy-Nagy, László 40
Mohr, Manfred 48–9, 53, 74, 93, 
111, 125–6, 132–3, 138–42, 
150–1, 173, 182–3, 199, 
241, 253, 274, 277, 284, 
285, 288
Cubic Limit  141
Cubic Limit  works 48
cubic signs 141
plotter 132
Moles, Abraham A. 86, 88, 150, 152
information aesthetics 150
Molnar, Vera 115, 125–6, 135–9, 
141, 162, 182, 241, 284, 
285
aesthetic judgment 138
Mona/Leo  188
Mona Lisa  188
Mondrian Experiment 59
Mondrian, Piet 146, 173
Composition in Line  (1916/17) 
60
INDEX 332
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts 
119
Morgan, Robert C. 86, 278
Morris, John 5, 269
Moscovich, Ivan 70
Mueller, Robert E. 4, 6, 35, 84, 
104, 144–5, 147–8, 153, 
210, 269, 272, 278, 280, 
286, 287, 296
multidimensional mathematics 65
multimedia 21
computer art 21
“Multimillion Dollar Art 
Boondoggle” 105
Mumford, Lewis 38, 106, 272
Museum of Modern Art 43, 109
Musgrave, F. Kenton 170, 234, 
252
Blessed State  170–1
landscape 170
Music from Mathematics  (1962) 
56
Mutator 240
Nadin, Mihai 192–3, 203, 205–6, 
208, 269, 274, 284, 285, 
292, 294
Nake, Frieder 31, 34, 39, 59, 
78–9, 88–90, 109, 145, 148, 
162, 205, 207–8, 271–2, 
279, 281, 287–8
National Museum of American 
Art 203
natural art 89
natural Luddites 40
natural phenomena 66, 69
complex disorders mapping 66
complex orders mapping 66
natural science 69
Nauman, Bruce 177
NCC Art Exhibition (1975) 110
Neal, Margaret 220, 224, 226, 
298Nees, Georg 31, 88, 90, 94–5, 
109, 279
Negroponte, Nicolas 145, 150, 
152, 197, 286, 287, 288, 
293
Neo-Plastic abstraction 46
Neuromancer  (1984) 263
New City 2  172–3
New Landscape in Art and 
Science, The  (1956) 40
new media art 247, 253
New Media in Late 20th Century 
Art (1999) 253
New Tendency (Novelle Tendence)  
42–3
New Tendency groups 81
New York Digital Salon 253, 262
New York Institute of Technology 
112
New York Times  1, 6, 31, 34, 58, 
59, 128, 145, 154, 194
Niépce, Nicéphore 46
Nine Evenings: Theatre and 
Engineering, The  44
Noll, A. Michael 31–4, 47, 54, 
58–63, 82, 88, 90, 93, 102, 
107–8, 145, 148–9, 162, 
197, 231, 258, 271, 272, 
276, 277, 279, 287, 293
computer-generated picture 
60–2
nonart 66
non-Euclidian geometries 146, 166
Norvell, Patricia 274
Oettinger, Anthony 93
Oldenburg, Claes 107
One-Dimensional Man  38
op art 65
optical scanners 96
Order Out of Chaos: Man ’s New 
Dialogue with Nature  
(1984) 162
INDEX 333
ORDVAC 27
Osaka World’s Fair (1970) 105
Oscillons  67–8, 69–70, 75
see also Electronic 
Abstractions
oscilloscope 69, 70, 75
Oswald, Wilhelm 67
Owens, Craig 209, 227
P018 Random Walk 1969 91
P-120-A Meta Language II  
139–40
PAGE  109, 250
Palyka, Duane M. 111, 281
“Parallel to Perception: Some 
Notes on the Problem of 
Machine-Generated Art” 
(1973) 129
par excellence  259
Pathway Series  175
Peitgen, Heinz-Otto 165, 168, 
282, 289, 290, 291
Pencil of Nature, The  (1844) 69
pendulum pattern makers 70
Pentagon of Power, The  (1970) 
106
Pepsi-Cola Company 105
periodicities 77
Persepol  160
personal computers 21
Philosophy of Computer Art, The 
(1969) 101
Photo-Eye  (1929) 67
photographic imagery 245
photographic images 46
photographic technologies 213–14
photography 67
Picasso, Pablo 3
Pickover, Clifford 168, 249, 290, 
295, 303
picture element 98
picture transformation 96
Piene, Otto 42, 87Pierce, John R. 56, 58, 86, 90, 
194, 271, 279, 293
Pitts, Walter 84
pixel 98
planner 116
Plant, Sadie 263
Platonic objectification 76
Platonic shape 72
Playboy  90
Plexus  70
plotter 31, 46, 48, 58, 70, 132, 
183–4, 186
development 74
microfilm 31–2
plotterdrawn static image 46
Poincaré, Henri 163
Pop art 100–1, 104
“imitating the imitators” 101
Popper, Frank 7, 46, 221–2, 226, 
253, 274, 290, 297, 298, 299
Portmann, Adolf 67
“Portrait of a Machine as a Young 
Artist” (1965) 58
post-mechanical reproduction 242
Postmodern Condition, The  
(1984) 164, 228
Postmodern Currents: Art and 
Artists in the Age of 
Electronic Media  213
postmodernism 23, 164, 201–2, 
209–10, 213, 215, 227, 230, 
245, 259, 263
critique 210
effect, contemporary 
imagination 209
mass art 231
photographic technology 213
theories 230–1
postmodern science 164
Preston, Stuart 4, 31, 34, 58,  
271, 276
Preusser, Robert 106–7, 192, 280, 
292
INDEX 334
priesthood 57
Prigogine, Ilya 162
Prince, Patric 116, 254, 303
proceduralism 234
Process art 104
programmed art 46
Prueitt, Melvin 160–2, 177, 
180–1, 193, 289, 291, 292
Bright Caven  161–2
Involution  160
Roadway to Somewhere  
180–1
pseudo randomness 82, 90
Pythagorean tradition 76
Radical Software  153
Rajchman, John 297
Rand, Henry 203
random behavior 90, 91
Rauchenberg, Robert 44
“Real Time Systems” 85
Reichardt, Jasia 4, 43, 53, 59, 78, 
85, 88, 99, 108, 110–11, 
114–15, 151–2, 225, 
249–50, 268, 275, 276, 278, 
279, 280, 281, 282, 288, 
289, 302
Renaissance teams 220
Resch, Mark 178, 202, 291, 294
RESEAU-TO 135
Responsive Eye, The  43
Ressler, Susan 245
digital photography 245
Return to Square A  100
Return to Square B  100
Reumuth, Horst 67
Rhizome 262
Richter, P. H. 165, 168, 282, 289, 
290, 291
Rivlin, Robert 291
Roadway to Somewhere  180–1
robotic drawing system 32
see also  AARONRockman, Arnold 25–7, 35, 40, 
63, 271, 273
Roh, Franz 67, 277
photography 67
Romantic Era 170
Rorimer, Anne 274
Rosebush, Judson 167, 211, 
233–4, 290, 296, 300
proceduralism 234
Rosen, Margit 8, 265, 268, 269, 
270, 276, 288, 304
Rosenberg, Harold 265
Rosler, Martha 227
Roszak, Theodore 55, 105, 196, 
275, 293
Roth, Moira 285, 287
Rubin, Cynthia 117
Runge, Ferdinand 67
Rush, Michael 7, 144, 253, 269, 
286, 303
Russian avant-garde 65
multidimensional mathematics 
65
Salon des Refusés  179, 232
Sandor, Ellen 220
San Francisco Museum of Modern 
Art 203
Sans Lever La Plume  185
Schapiro, Meyer 62, 90,  
276, 279
Schillinger, Joseph 70, 83, 278
School of Visual Arts, New York 
253
Schwartz, Elliott 5, 268
Schwartz, Lillian 113, 115–17, 
144, 157, 189, 205, 270, 
282
Leonardo’s Last Supper  188
media technologies 188
Science of Art, The  35
scientific visualization 220
“second order” cybernetics 114
INDEX 335
Shaffer, Elinor 96, 273
Shaffer, James 96
Shanken, Edward 8–9, 44, 52, 
270, 273, 274, 280
Shannon, Claude 84
shape grammars 143
Shapin, Steven 299
Shearer, Rhonda 166, 289,  
290
non-Euclidian geometries 166
Sheridan, Sonia Landy 134, 257
Sherman, Cindy 215, 227
Shot Kennedy No 1 , 100
SIGGRAPH see Special Interest 
Group on Computer 
Graphics (SIGGRAPH)
Sim, Stuart 164, 289, 299
simulacra 229
Sine Curve Man  96
sine curves 70
sine wave 69
Skew J17  182–3
Slant One  79
Smith, Brian R. 211, 217–19, 296, 
297, 298
Smith, Gary William 145
Smith, Stuart 144, 286
Snail, The  73
Snow, C. P. 16, 39, 63
“soft” mastery 134, 136
software exhibition 45, 85, 104
Solomon-Godeau, Abigail 297
Spalter, Anne M. 8, 116–17, 282, 
302–3
spatial arrangement 77
Special Interest Group on 
Computer Graphics 
(SIGGRAPH) 112, 232, 
233, 262
categories 188, 189
abstract 189
graphic design 189
human image 189landscape 189
visual research 189
conference 116, 201, 203
exhibitions 116, 245
Spencer, Dorothy 109, 124, 203, 
295
spin art 251
spiral geometry 73
Splatter Pattern , computer 
artwork 26
Stain Glass Window , computer 
artwork 26
Stengers, Isabelle 162
Stephan, Gary 287
Stiny, George 143, 257, 285, 286, 
304
stochastic 91
Strand, Kerry 70, 73
Studies in Perception: Gargoyle  97
Stuttgart School 88
stylus 21
Sumner, Lloyd 113, 118–22, 171, 
264, 282, 283
Sumnergrams 121
Sutcliffe, Alan 109
Symbols, Signals, and Noise  
(1961) 86
symmetrical motion 69
symmetry 77
synthetic organic forms 238
tablets 1
Talbot, William Henry Fox 46, 
69, 121
Tamblyn, Christine 46, 274
Taviss, Irene 56, 275
Taylor, Grant D. 276, 282, 303
technocratic spirit 36–7
Technological Society, The  38
technology-based art 86
electronic music 86
multimedia installations 86
robotics 86
INDEX 336
technoscience paradigms 17
technoscience themes 21
telecommunication networks 262
Tendril  236
Tensey, Mark 166
Thompson, D’Arcy 72
Todd, Stephen 238, 240, 301
Toffler, Alvin 113
Travis, Irene 54, 56
tre graphiques  140
Tribe, Mark 262
trivial dabbling 146
Truckenbrod, Joan 116, 187, 199, 
245, 282, 292, 294
Tsuchiya, Haruki 34, 90, 101, 
107, 272, 279
Turing, Alan Mathison 54–5, 59, 
61, 90
Turing Test 59
Turkle, Sherry 120, 132, 134, 136, 
190, 244, 283, 285, 292, 
302
styles, computing programming 
134
“hard” mastery 134
“soft” mastery 134, 136
23-Corner Graphic  94
Two Cultures, The  39, 41
Two Cultures debate 16, 19, 43, 
63, 108, 143, 251, 258
Two Cultures: A Second Look, 
The 40, 41
2001: A Space Odyssey  56
Understanding Media  38
UNIVAC computer 55–6
Universal Picture Generator 89
University of Utah 112
Untitled , pre-computer painting 
182
U.S. Air Force Laboratories 261
USCO 44
user-friendly interface 260V&A, London 8
Vasarely, Victor 41
quasi-scientific approaches 42
vector-based graphics 183
Venn, John 91–2, 171
graph 91
randomness 91–2
Vent Noir II  185
Vergine, Lea 42–3, 273
Verifying Star  77
Verostko, Roman 76, 157,  
171–6, 184, 192, 234,  
237, 242, 252, 254–5, 277, 
288, 289, 290, 291, 300, 
301, 303
Bild 1712/65 , 173
biology concepts 237
“control and uncontrol” 172, 
175
New City 2  172–3
video art 12, 20, 153–4
cybernetics 154
information theory 154
Virilio, Paul 228
Virtual Reality: An Emerging 
Medium  263
Virtual Renaissance 18–19
virtual sculptures 238
see also  synthetic organic forms
virtuality 24, 75, 96, 155, 263-4
visual abstraction 78
Europeans 78
visual artists 26
visual arts 117
women 117
visual mathematics 78
visual research 86, 137, 189
Vladimir, Bonac ic , 103, 149
von Neumann, John 36–7, 167
science and technology 36–7
Walker Art Center 43
Wallis, Brian 215, 297
INDEX 337
Wands, Bruce, 9, 268, 270
Warhol, Andy 177, 190
Web-based art 262
Weibel, Peter 2, 268, 303
Westernhouse Electric 
Corporation 29
Whitelaw, Mitchell 237, 301
Whitney, John 113
Wiener, Norbert 84–5, 278
Wilson, Mark 11, 180–3, 198, 
250, 253, 255, 270, 291, 
294, 302
Skew J17 , 182–3
Withington, Frederic G. 57, 275Wittgenstein, Ludwig 78
Woodward, Kathleen 272, 280, 
307
World Wide Web 262
Wright, Richard 12, 247, 270, 302
Youngblood, Gene 4, 154, 197, 
205, 207, 225, 293, 299
Young, Jeffery 56, 275
Zajec, Edward 111, 136, 180, 
191, 285, 292
Zero 42
ZKM, Karlsruhe Germany 8
