ubuclassics
2005WILLIAM S. BURROUGHS
The
ElectronicRevolution
ubuclassics
2005THE ELECTRONIC 
REVOLUTION
WILLIAM S. BURR OUGHS
The Electronic Revolution
William S. Burroughs
Originally published in 1970 by Expanded Media Editions 
ubu classics
www.ubu.com 
4FEEDBACK FROM WATERGATE TO THE GARDEN OF EDEN
In the beginning was the word and the word was god and has remained one of
the mysteries ever since. The word was God and the word was flesh we are told. Inthe beginning of what exactly was this beginning word? In the beginning of WRIT-TEN history . It is generally assumed that spoken word came before the writtenword. I suggest that the spoken word as we know it came after the written word. Inthe beginning was the word and the word was God and the word was flesh ...human flesh ... In the beginning of WRITING. Animals talk and convey informa-
tion but they do not write. They cannot make information available to future gener-
ations or to animals outside the range of their communication system. This is thecrucial distinction between men and other animals. WRITING. Korzybski, whodeveloped the concept of General Semantics, the meaning of meaning, has pointedout this human distinction and described man as ‘the time binding animal’. He canmake information to other men over a length of time through writing. Animals talk.They don ’t write . Now a wise old rat may know a lot about traps and poison but he
cannot write a te xt book on DEA TH TRAPS IN Y OUR W AREHOUSE f or the
Reader’s Digest with tactics for ganging up on digs and ferrets and taking care of
wise guys w ho stuf fsteel wool up our holes. It is doubtful if the spoke word would
have ever evolved beyond the animal stage without the written word. The written
word ist inferential in HUMAN speech. It would not occur to our wise old rat toassemble the young rats and pass his knowledge along in an aural tradition
BECAUSE THE WHOLE CONCEPT OF TIME BINDING COULD NOT
OCCUR WITHOUT THE WRITTEN WORD. The written word is of course asymbol for something and in the case of hieroglyphic language writing like Egyptianit may be a symbol for itself that is a picture of what it represents. This is not true of
an alphabet language like English. The word leg has no pictorial resemblance to a
leg. It refers to the SPOKEN word leg. so we may forget that a written word IS ANIMAGE and that written words are images in sequence that is to say MOVING
4
PICTURES. So any hieroglyphic sequence gives us an immediate working defini-
tion f or spoken words. Spoken words are verbal units that refer to this pictorial
sequence. And what then is the written word? My basis theory is that the written
word was literally a virus that made spoken word possible. The word has not been
recognized as a virus because it has achieved a state of stable symbiosis with the
host...(This symbiotic relationship is now breaking down for reasons I will suggestlater.)
I quote from MECHANISMS OF VIRUS INFECTION edited by Mr. Wilson
Smith, a scientist who really thinks about his subject instead of merely correlatingdata. He thinks, that is, about the ultimate intentions of the virus organism. In anarticle entitled VIRUS ADAPTIBILITY AND HOST RESISTANCE by G.Belyavin, speculations as to the biologic goal of the virus species are enlarged ...
‘Viruses are obligatory cellular parasites and are thus wholly dependant upon the
integrity of the cellular systems they parasitize for their survival in an active state. Itis something of a paradox that many viruses ultimately destroy the cells in which
they are living...”
And I may add the environment necessary for any cellular structure they could
parasitize to survive. Is the virus then simply a time bomb left on this planet to beactivated by remote control? An extermination program in fact? In its path from fullvirulence to its ultimate goal of symbiosis will any human creature survive? Is thewhite race, which would seem to be more under virus control than the black yellow
and brown races, giving any indication of workable symbiosis?
‘Taking the virus e ye view, the ideal situation would appear to be one in which
the virus r eplica tes in cells without in an y way disturbing their nor mal metabolism.’
This has been sug gested as the ideal biological situa tion to ward which all virus-
es are slowly e volving ...’
Would y ou of fer violence to a w ell intentioned virus on its slo w road to symbio-
sis?
‘It is w orth noting tha t ifa virus w ere to attain a state of wholly benign equilib-
rium with its host cell it is unlikely tha t its pr esence w ould be r eadily detected OR
THA T IT W OULD NECESSARIL Y BE RECOGNIZED AS A VIR US. I suggest
that the w ord is just suc h a virus . Doktor Kurt Unruh von Steinplatz has put forth
an inter esting theor y as to the origins and histor y of this word virus. He postulates
5ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
5
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
6that the word was a virus of what he calls BIOLOGIC MUTATION effecting the
biologic change in its host which was then genetically conveyed. One reason that
apes cant talk is because the structure of their inner throats is simply not designed toformulate words. He postulates that alteration in inner throat structure were occa-sioned by virus illness ... And not occasion ... This illness may well have had a highrate of mortality but some female apes must have survived to give birth to the wun-
der kindern. The illness perhaps assumed a more malignant form in the male
because of his more developed and rigid muscular structure causing death throughstrangulation and vertebral fracture. Since the virus in both male and female precip-itates sexual frenzy through irritation of sex centers in the brain the males impreg-nated the females in their death spasms and the altered throat structured was geneti-cally conveyed. Having effected alterations in the host’s structure that resulted in anew species specially designed to accomodate the virus the virus can now replicate
without disturbing the metabolism and without being recognized a virus. A symbiot-
ic relationship has now been established and the virus is now built into the hostwhich sees the virus as a useful part of itself. This successful virus can now sneer atgangster viruses like small pox and turn them in to The Pasteur Institute. Ach jun-gen what a scene is here ... the apes are moulting fur steaming off them femaleswhimpering and slobbering over dying males like cows with aftosa and so a stinkmusky sw eet rotten metal stink of the forbidden fruit in the Gar den of Eden...
The cr eation of Adam, the Gar den of Eden, Adam’s fainting spell during
which God made Eva from his body , the forbidden fruit which was of course knowl-
edge of the w hole stinking thing and might be ter med the first Watergate scandal,
all slots neatly into Doc Steinplatz’s theory . And this was a white myth. This leads to
the supposition that the word virus assumed a specially malignant and lethal form inthe white race. What then accounts for this special malignance of the white word
virus? Most likely a virus mutation occasioned by radioactivity .All animal and insect
experiments so far carried out indicate that mutations resulting from radiation areunfavorable that is not conductive to survival. These experiments relate to the effectsof radiation on autonomous creatures. What about the effects of radiation on virus-
es? Are there not perhaps some so classified and secret experiments hiding behind
national security? Virus mutations occasioned by radiation may be quite favorablefor the virus. And such a virus might well violate the equilibrium with the host cell.
6
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
7So now with the tape recorders of Watergate and the fall out from atomic testing
the virus stir s uneasy in all your white throats. It was a killer virus once. It could
become a killer virus again and rage through cities of the world like a topping forest
fire.
“It is the beginning of the end.” That was the reaction of a science attache’ at
one of Washington’s major embassies to reports that a synthetic gene particle hadbeen produced in the laboratory ...”Any small country can now make a virus for
which there is no cure. It would only take a small laboratory . Any small country with
good biochemists could do it.”
And presumeably any big country could do it quicker and better.In the Electronic Revolution I advance the theory that a virus IS a very small
unit of word and image. I have suggested now such units can be biologically activat-
ed to act as communicable virus strains. Let us start with three tape recorders in
The Garden of Eden. Tape recorder 1 is Adam. Tape recorder 2 is Eve. Taperecorder 3 is God, who deteriorated after Hiroshima into the Ugly American. Or to
return to our primevil scene: Tape recorder 1 is the male ape in a helpless sexual
frenzy as the virus strangles him. Tape recorder 2 is a cooing female ape who strad-dles him. Tape recorder 3 is DEATH.
Steinplatz postulates that the virus of biologic mutation, which he calls Virus B-
23, is contained in the word. Unloosing this virus from the word could be moredeadly that loosing the power of the atom. Because all hate all pain all fear all lust is
contained in the word. Perhaps we have here in these three tape recorders the virusofbiologic m utation which once gave us the word and has hidden behind the word
ever since . And perhaps thr ee tape r ecorders and some good biochemists can
unloose this f orce. Now look a t these thr ee tape recorders and think in terms of the
virus particle . Recorder 1 is the per spectiv e host f or an influenza virus. Tape
recorder n umber 2 is the means b y which the virus gains access to the host, in the
case of a flu virus b y disolving a hole in cells of the host’ s respiratory tract. Number
2, ha ving g ained access to the cell. leads in n umber 3. Number 3 is the ef fect pr o-
duced in the host b y the virus: coughing , fever, inflamation. NUMBER 3 IS
OBJECTIVE REALITY PR ODUCED BY THE VIR US IN THE HOST V iruses
make themselv es real. It’ s a wa y viruses ha ve. We now have three tape recorders. So
we will make a simple w ord virus . Let us suppose that our target is a rival politician.
7
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
8On tape r ecorder 1 we will record speeches and conversation carefully editing in stam-
mers mispronouncing, inept phrases ... the worst number 1 can assemble. now on tape
recorder 2 we will make so a love tape by bugging his bed room. We can potentiate thistape by splicing it in with a sexual object that is inadmissible or inaccessible or both, saythe senator’s teen age daughter. On tape recorder 3 we will record hateful disapprovingvoices and splice the three recordings together at very short intervals and play them back
to the senator and his constituents. This cutting and playback can be very complex
involving speech scramblers and batteries of tape recorders but THE BASIC PRINCI-PAL IS SIMPLY SPLICING SEX TAPE AND DISAPPROVAL TAPES IN TOGETH-ER. Once the associations lines are established they are activated every time the sena-tor’s speech centres are activated which is all the time heavan help that sorry bestard ifanything happened to his big mouth. So his teen age daughter crawls all over him whileTexas rangers and decent church going women rise from tape recorder 3 screaming
“WHAT ARE YOU DOING IN FRONT OF DECENT PEOPLE.”
The teen age daughter is just a refinement. Basically all you need is sex recordings
on number 2 and hostile recordings on number 3. With this simple formula any CIAsonofabitch can become God that is tape tape recorder 3. Notice the emphasis on sexualmaterial in burglaries and bugging in the Watergate cess pool ...Bugging Martin LutherKing’s bed room ...Kiss Kiss bang bang ...A deadly assassination technique. At the veryleast sur e to unerv e and put opponents a t a disadv antage . So the r eal scandal of
Watergate tha t has not come out yet is not that bed rooms were bugged and the offices
ofpsychiatrists ransaked but THE PRECISE USE THAT WAS AND IS MADE OF
THIS SEXU AL MA TERIAL. T his formula works best on a closed circit. If sexual
recordings and film are widespread, tolerated and publicaly shown tape recorder 3 losses
ist power. Which perhaps explains why the Nixon administration is out to close down setfilms and reestablish censorship on all films and books. to keep close circit on tape
recorder 3.
And this brings us to the subject of SEX. In the words of the late John O’Hara I’m
glad you came to me instead of one of those quacks on the top floor ...Psychiatrists,priests whatever they call themselves they want to turn in off and keep tape recorder 3 in
business. Let’s turn it on. All you swingers use video cameras and tape recorders to
record and photograph your sessions. Now go over the session and pick out the sexiestpieces you know when it really HAPPENS. Reich built a machine with electrodes
8
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
9attached to the penis to measure this orgasm charge. Here is unpleasurable orgasm
sagging ominously as tape recorder 3 cuts in. He just made it. And here is a pleasur-
able orgasm way up on the graph. So take the best of your sessions and invite thenabors to see it. Its the naborly thing to do. Try cutting them in together alternating24 frames per second. Try slow downs and speed ups.
Build and experiment with orgone accumulators. Its simply a box of any shape
or size lined with iron. Your intrepid reporter at age 37 achieved spontaneous
orgasm no hands in an orgone accumulator built in an orange grove inPharr/Texas. It was the small direct application accumulator that did the trick.That’s what every red blooded boy and girl should be doing in their basement workshop. The orgone accumulator could be greatly potentiated by using MAGNE-TIZED IRON which sends a powerful magnetic field through the body . And smallaccumulators like ray guns.
There is Two Gun Maggee going off in his pants. The gun falls from his hand.
Quick as he was he was not quick enough.
For a small directional accumulator obtain six powerful magnets. Arrange your
magnetized squares so they form a box. In one end of the box drill a hole and insertan iron tube. Now cover the box and tube with any organic material...rubber,leather,cloth. Now train the tube on your privates and the privates of yourfriends and nabor s. Its good f or young and old man and beast and is kno wn as SEX.
It is also kno wn to ha ve a dir ect connection with w hat is known as LIFE. Let’s get
St. P aul off our backs and take off the bible belt. And tell tape recorder 3 to cover
his o wn dirty thing . It stinks fr om the garden of Eden to Watergate.
I have said that the real scandal of Watergate is the use made of recordings.
And what is this use? Having made the recordings as described what then do theydo with them?
ANSWER: THEY PLAY THEM BACK ON LOCATION.They play these recordings back to the target himself is the target is an individ-
ual from passing cars and agents that walk by him in the street. They play theserecordings back in his naborhood. Finally they play them back in subways, restau-
rants, air ports and other public places.
PLAYBACK is the essential ingredient.I have made a number of experiments with street recordings and playback over 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
10a period of years and the startling fact emerges THAT YOU DO NOT NEED
SEX RECORDINGS OR EVEN DOCTORED TAPES TO PRODUCEEFFECTS BY PLAYBACK. ANY RECORDINGS PLAYED BACK ON LOCA-TION IN THE MANNER I WILL NOW DESCRIBE CAN PRODUCEEFFECTS. No doubt sexual and doctored tapes would be more powerful. But some
of the power in the word is released by simple playback as anyone can verify who
will take the time to experiment ...I quote from some notes on these playback exper-iments.
Friday July 28, 1972 ...Plan 28 at a glance ...First some remarks on the tape
recorder experiments started by Ian Sommerville in 196. these involved not only
street, pub, party , subway recordings but also PLAYBACK on location. when I
returned to London from the States in 1966 he had already accumulated a consider-
able bod y of data and developed a technology . He had discovered that playback on
location can pr oduce definite effects. Playing back recordings of an accident can
produce another accident. In 1966 I was staying at the Rushmore Hotel, 11
Trebovir Road, Earl’s Court, and we carried out a number of these operations:
street recordings, cut in of other material, playback in the streets ...(I recall I had cutin fire engines and while playing this tape back in the street fire engines passed.)These experiments were summarized in THE INVISIBLE GENERATION ... ( Iwonder if anybody but CIA agents read this article or thought of putting these tech-niques into actual operation) Anybody who carries out similar experiments over aperiod of time will turn up more ‘coincidences’ than the law of averages allows.The tech can be extended by taking still or moving pictures during playback. I have
frequently observed this operation: make recordings and take pictures of some loca-
tion you wish to discomode or destroy , now play recordings back and take more pic-tures, will result in accidents, fires, removals. especially the latter The target moves.We carried out this operation with the Scientology Center at 37 Fitzroy Street.Some months later they moved to 68 Tottenham Court Road, where a similar oper-ation was carried out...
Here is a sample operation carried out against The Moka Bar at 29 Frith Street
London W1 beginning on August 3, 1972 ...Reverse Thursday ...Reason for opera-tion was outrageous and unprovoked discourtesy and poisoned cheese cake...
Now to close in on The Moka Bar. Record. Take pictures. Stand around out- 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
11side. Let them see me. They are seething around in there. The horrible old propri-
etor, his frizzy haired wife and slack jawed son, the snarling counter man. I have
them and they know it.
“You boys have a rep for making trouble. Well come on out and make some.
Pull a camera breaking act and I’ll call a Bobby . I gotta right to do what I like in thepublic street.”
If it came to that I would explain to the policeman that I was taking street
recordings and making a documentary of Soho. This was after all London’s FirstExpresso Bar was it not? I was doing them a favor. They couldnt say what both ofus knew without being ridiculous...
“He’s not making any documentary . He’s trying to blow up the coffee machine,
start a fire in the kitchen, start fights in here, get us a citation from the Board ofHealth.”
Yes I had them and they knew it. I looked in at the old Prop and smiled as if he
would like what I was doing. Playback would come later with more pictures. I tookmy time and strolled over to the Brewer Street Market where I recorded a threecard Monte Game. Now you see it now you dont.
Playback was carried out a number of times with more pictures. Their business
fell off. They kept shorter and shorter hours. October 30, 1972 The Moka Barclosed. T he loca tion was taken o ver by The Queens Snack Bar.
Now to apply the 3 tape r ecorder analog y to this simple opera tion. T ape
recorder 1 is the Moka Bar itself it is pristine condition. Tape recorder 2 is MY
RECORDINGS of the Moka Bar vicinity . These recordings are ACCESS. Tape
recorder 2 in the Garden of Eden was Eve made from Adam. So a recording made
from the Moka Bar is a piece of the Moka Bar. The recording once made, this piecebecomes autonomous and out of their control. Tape recorder 3 is PLAYBACK.
Adam experiences shame when his DISCRACEFUL BEHAVIOR IS PLAYED
BACK TO HIM BY tape recorder 3 which is God. By playing back my recordingsto the Moka Bar when I want and with any changes I wish to make in the record-ings, I become God for this local. I effect them. They cannot effect me. And what
part do photos take in this operation? Recall what I said earlier about written and
sopken word. THE WRITTEN WORD IS AN IMAGE IS A PICTURE . The spo-ken word could be defined as any verbal units that correspond to these pictures and 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
12could be in fact be extended to ANY SOUND UNITS THAT CORRESPOND to
to the pictures ...Recordings and pictures are tape recorder 2 which is access. Taperecorder 3 is playback and ‘reality’. For example suppose your bathroom and bedroom are bugged and rigged with hidden infra red cameras. These pictures andrecordings give access. You may not experience shame during defecation and inter-
course but you may well experience shame when these recordings are played back to
a disapproving audience.
Now let us consider the arena of politics and the applications of bugging in this
area. Of course any number of recordings are immediately available since politi-
cians make speec hes on TV . However, these recordings do not give access. The man
who is making a speech is not really there. Consequently more intimate or at least
private recordings are needed which is why the Watergate conspirators had to resort
to burgulary . A presidential candidate is not a sitting duck like a Moka Bar. He can
make an y number of recordings of his opponents. So the game is complex and
competitiv e with recordings made by both sides. This leads to more sophisticated
techniques the details of which have yet to come out. The basic operation of
recording pictures, more pictures and playback can be carried out by anyone with arecorder and a camera. Any number can play . Millions of people could nullify thecontrol system which those who are behind Watergate and Nixon are attempting toimpose. Like all control systems it depends on maintaining a monopoly position. Ifanybody can be tape recorder 3 then tape recorder 3 loses power. God must beTHE GOD.
ELECTRONIC REVOLUTION
In THE INVISIBLE GENERATION first published in IT and in the Los
Angeles Free Press in 1966 and reprinted in THE JOB, I consider the potential ofthousands of people with recorders, portable and stationary , messages passed alonglike signal drums, a parody of the President’s speech up and down the balconies, inand out open windows, through walls, over courtyards, taken up by barking dogs,muttering bums, music, traffic down windy streets, across parks and soccer fields.Illusion is a revolutionary weapon:
TO SPREAD RUMOURSPut ten operators with carefully prepared recordings out at rush hour and see
how quick the words get around. People don’t know where they heard it but they 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
13heard it.
TO DISCREDIT OPPONENTSTake a recorded Wallace speech, cut in stammering coughs sneezes hiccoughs
snarls pain screams fear whimperings apoplectic sputterings slobbering droolingidiot noises sex and animal sound effects and play it back in the streets subway sta-
tions parks political rallies.
AS A FRONT LINE WEAPON TO PRODUCE AND ESCALATE RIOTSThere is nothing mystical about this operation. Riot sound effects can produce
an actual riot in a riot situation. RECORDED POLICE WHISTLES WILL
DRA W COPS. RECORDED GUNSHOTS, AND THEIR GUNS ARE OUT .
“MY GOD , THEY’VE KILLING US.”
A guar dsman said la ter: “I heard and saw my buddy go down, his face covered
in blood (tur ned out he’d been hit by a stone from a sling shot) and I thought, well
this is it.” BL OOD Y WEDNESDAY . A DAZED AMERICA COUNTED 23
DEAD AND 32 W OUNDED, 6 CRITICALLY .
Here is a run of the mill, pre-riot situation. Protesters have been urged to
demonstrate peacefully , police and guardsmen to exercise restraint. Ten taperecorders strapped under their coats, playback, and record controlled from lapelbuttons. They have prerecorded riot sound effects from Chicago, Paris, Mexico City ,Kent/Ohio. If they adjust sound levels of recordings to surrounding sound levels,they will not be detected. Police scuffle with the demonstrators. The operators con-verge. turn on Chicago record, play back, move on to the next scuffles, record play-back, keep moving. Things are hotting up, a cop is down groaning. shrill chorus of
recorded pig squeals and parody groans.
Could you cool a riot by recording the calmest cop and the most reasonable
demonstrator? Maybe! However, it’s a lot easier to start trouble that to stop it. Justpointing out that cut/ups on the tape recorder can be used as a weapon. You’llobserve that the operators are making a cutup as they go. They are cutting inChicago, Paris, Mexico City , Kent Ohio with the present sound effects at randomand that is a cutup.
AS A LONG RANGE WEAPON TO SCRAMBLE AND NULLIFY ASSO-
CIATIONAL LINES PUT DOWN BY MASS MEDIA
The control of the mass media depends on laying down lines of association.
When the lines are cut the associational connections are broken. 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
14President Johnson burst into a swank apartment, held three girls at gunpoint,
26 miles north of Saigon yesterday .
you can cut the mutter line of the mass media and put the altered mutter line
out in the streets with a tape recorder. Consider the mutter line of the daily press. Itgoes up with the morning papers, millions of people read the same words. In differ-ent ways, of course. A motion praising Mr. Callaghan’s action in banning the South
African Cricket Tour has spoiled the colonel’s breakfast. All reacting one way or
another to the paper world or unseen events which becomes an integral part of yourreality . You will notice that this process is continually subject to random juxtaposta-tion. Just what sign did you see in the Green Park station as you glanced up from thePEOPLE? Just who called as you were reading your letter in the TIMES? Whatwere you reading when your wife broke a dish in the kitchen? An unreal paperworld and yet completely real because it is actually happening. Mutter line of the
EVENING NEWS, TV . Fix yourself on millions of people all watching Jesse James
or the Virginian at the same time. International mutter line of the weekly newsmagazine always dated a week ahead. Have you noticed it’s the kiss of death to beon the front cover of TIME. Madam Nhu was there when her husband was killedand her government fell. Verwoerd was on the front cover of TIME when a demontapeworm gave the order for his death through a messenger of the same. Read theBible, kept to himself , no bad habits , you know the type. Old reliable, read all about
it.
So stir in news stories , TV plays, stock market quotations, adverts and put the
altered m utter line out in the str eets.
The underground press serves as the only effective counter to a growing power
and more sophisticated technique used by establishment mass media to falsify , mis-represent, misquote, rule out of consideration as a PRIORI ridiculous or simply
ignore and blot out of existence: data, books, discoveries that they consider prejudi-
cial to establishment interest.
I suggest that the underground press could perform this function much more
effectively by the use of cut/up techniques. For example, prepare cut/ups of the
ugliest reactionary statements you can find and surround them with the ugliest pic-
tures. Now give it the drool, slobber, animal noise treatment and put it out on themutter line with recorders. Run a scramble page in every issue of a transcribed tape 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
15recorded cut/up of news, radio and TV . Put the recordings out on the mutter line
before the paper hits the stand. It gives you a funny feeling to see a headline that’sbeen going round and round inside your head. The underground press could add amutter line to their adverts and provide a unique advertising service. Cut the prod-uct in with pop tunes, cut the product in with advertising slogans and jingles of
other products and siphon off the sales. Anybody that doubts that these techniques
work has only to put them to the test. The techniques here described are in use bythe CIA and agents of other countries ...Ten years ago they were making systematicstreet recordings in every district of Paris. I recall the Voice of America man in
Tangier and a room full of tape recorders and you could hear some strange sounds
through the wall. Kept to himself, hello in the hall. Nobody was ever allowed in that
room, not e ven a fatima. Of course, there are many technical elaborations like long-
range dir ectional mikes . When cutting the prayer call in with hog grunts it doesn’t
pay to be walking ar ound the market place with a portable tape recorder.
An article in NEW SCIENTIST J une 4, 1970, page 470, entitled ‘ Electronic
Arts of Non communication ‘ by Richard C French gives the clue for more precise
technical instructions.
In 1968, with the help of Ian Sommerville and Anthony Balch, I took a short
passage of my recorded voice and cut it into intervals of one twenty - fourth of asecond movie tape (movie tape is larger and easier to splice)- and rearranged theorder of the 24th second intervals of recorded speech. The original words are quiteunintelligible but new words emerge. The voice is still there and you can immediate-ly recognise the speaker. Also the tone of the voice remains. If the tone is friendly ,
hostile, sexual, poetic, sarcastic lifeless, despairing, this will be apparent in the
altered sequence.
I did not realise at the time that I was using a technique that has been in exis-
tence since 1881 ...I quote from Mr. French’s article ... “designs for speech scram-blers go back to 1881 and the desire to make telephone and radio communicationsunintelligible to third parties has been with us ever since”... The message is scram-bled in transmission and then unscrambled at the other end. There are many ofthese speech scrambling devices that work on different principles... “another devicewhich saw service during the war was the time division scrambler. The signal waschopped up into elements .005 cm long. These elements are taken in groups or 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
16frames and rearranged in a new sequence. Imagine that the speech recorded is
recorded on magnetic tape which is cut into pieces .02 long and the piecesrearranged into a new sequence. This can actually be done and gives a good ideawhat speech sounds like when scrambled in this way .”
This I had done in 1968. And this is an extension of the cut/up method. The
simplest cut/up cuts a page down the middle and across the middle into four sec-
tions. Section 1 is then placed with section 4 and section 3 with section 2 in a newsequence. Carried further we can break the page down into smaller and smallerunits in altered sequences.
The original purpose of scrambling devices was to make the message unintelli-
gible without scrambling the code. Another use for speech scramblers could be to
impose thought contr ol on a mass scale . consider the Human body and nervous sys-
tem as unscramb ling de vices. A common virus like the cold sore could sensitize the
subject to unscramb le messages . Drugs like LSD and Dim-N could also act as
unscramb ling devices. Moreover, the mass media could sensitize millions of people
to receive scrambled versions of the same set of data. Remember that when the
human nervous system unscrambles a scrambled message this will seem to the sub-ject like his very own ideas which just occurred to him, which indeed it did.
Take a card, any card. In most cases he will not suspect its extraneous origin.
that is the run of the mill newspaper reader who receives the scrambled messageuncritically and assumes that it reflects his own opinions independently arrived at.On the other other hand, the subject may recognise or suspect the extraneous ori-gins of voices that are literally hatching out in his head. Then we have a classic syn-
drome of paranoid psychosis. Subject hears voices. Anyone can be made to hear
voices with scrambling techniques. It is not difficult to expose him to the actualscrambled message, any part of which can be made intelligible. This can be donewith street recorders, recorders in cars, doctored radio and TV sets. In his own flat ifpossible, if not in some bar or restaurant he frequents. If he doesn’t talk to himself,he soon will do. You bug his flat. Now he is really round the bend hearing his ownvoice out of radio and TV broadcasts and the conversation of passing strangers. Seehow easy it is? Remember the scrambled message is partially unintelligible and inany case he gets the tone. Hostile white voices unscrambled by a Negro will alsoactivate by association every occasion on which he has been threatened or humiliat- 
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
17ed by whites. To carry it further you can use recordings of voices known to him.
You can turn him against his friends by hostile scrambled messages in a friend’svoice. This will activate ll his disagreements with that friend. You can condition himto like his enemies by friendly scrambled messages in enemy voices.
On the other hand the voices can be friendly and reassuring. He is now work-
ing for the CIA, the GPU, or whatever, and these are his orders. They now have an
agent who has no information to give away and who doesn’t have to be paid. and heis now completely under control. If he doesn’t obey orders they can give him thehostile voice treatment. No, “They” are not God or super technicians from outer
space . Just technicians operating with well-known equipment and using techniques
that can be duplicated by anyone else who can buy and operate this equipment.
To see ho w scrambling technique could work on a a mass scale, imagine that a
news mag azine like TIME got out a w hole issue a week before publication and filled
it with news based on pr edictions f ollowing a certain line, without attempting the
impossib le, giving our boys a boost in every story and the Commies as many defeats
and casualties as possib le, a whole new issue of TIME formed from slanted predic-
tion of future news. Now imagine this scrambled out through the mass media.
With minimal equipment you can do the same thing on a smaller scale. You
need a scrambling device, TV , radio, two video cameras, a ham radio station and asimple photo studio with a few props and actors. For a start you scramble the newsall together and spit it out every which way on ham radio and street recorders. Youconstruct fake news broadcasts on video camera. For the pictures you can use mostlyold footage. Mexico City will do for a riot in Saigon Chile you can use the
Londonderry pictures. Nobody knows the difference. Fires, earthquakes, plane
crashes can be moved around. for example, here is a plane crash in Toronto 108dead. so move the picture of the Barcelona plane crash over to Toronto andToronto to Barcelona. And you scramble your fabricated news in with actual newsbroadcasts.
You have an advantage which your opposing player does not have. He must
conceal his manipulations. You are under no such necessity . In fact you can advertisethe fact that you are writing the news in advance and trying to make it happen bytechniques which anybody can use. And that makes you NEWS. And TV personali-ty as well, if you play it right. You want the widest possible circulation for your 
cut/up video tapes . Cut/up techniques could swamp the mass media with total illu-
sion.
Fictional dailies retroactively cancelled the San Francisco earthquake and
Halifax explosion as journalistic hoaxes, and doubt released from the skin lawextendible and ravenous, consumed all the facts of history .
Mr French concludes his article ...”The use of modern microelectric integrated
circuits could lower the cost of speech scramblers enough to see them in use by pri-
vate citizens. Codes and ciphers have always had a strong appeal to most people andI think scramblers will as well...”
It is generally assumed that speech must be consciously understood to cause an
effect. Early experiments with subliminal images have shown that this is not true. Anumber of research projects could be based on speech scramblers. We have all seenthe experiment where someone hears his own recorded voice back a few seconds
later. Soon he cannot go on talking. Would scrambled speech have the same effect?
to what extent does a language act as unscrambling in either-or conflict terms? Towhat extent does the tone of voice used by a speaker impose a certain unscramblingsequence on the listener?
Many of the cut/up tapes would be entertaining and in fact entertainment is
the most promising field for cut/up techniques. Imagine a pop festival like PhunCity sc heduled f or July 24th, 25th, 26, 1970 a t Ecclesden Common, P atching, near
Worthing , Susse x. Festival area comprised of car park and camping area, a rock
auditorium, a village with booths and cinema, a lar ge wooded area. A number of
Tape r ecorders planted in the woods and the village. As many as possible so as to lay
down a grid of sound over the whole festival. Recorders have tapes of prerecorded
material, music, news, broadcasts, recordings from other festivals, etc. At all timessome of the recorders are playing back and some are recording. The recorders
recording the crowd and the other tape recorders that are playing back at varying
distances. This cuts in the crowd who will be hearing their own voices back. Playback, wind back and record could be electronically controlled with varying intervals.Or they could be hand operated, the operator deciding what intervals of play back,
record, and wind to use. Effect is greatly increased by a large number of festival
goers with portable recorders playing back and recording as they walk around thefestival. We can carry it further with projection screens and video cameras. Some ofubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
18
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
19the material is pre-prepared, sex films, films of other festivals, and this material is
cut in with live TV broadcasts and shots of the crowd. Of course, the rock festivalwill be cut in on the screens, thousands of fans portable recorders recording, andplaying back, the singer could direct play back and record. Set up an area for travel-ling performers, jugglers, animal acts, snake charmers, singers, musicians, and cut
these acts in. Film and tape from the festival, edited for best material, could then be
used at other festivals.
Quite a lot of equipment and engineering to set it up. the festival could certain-
ly be enhanced if as many festival goers as possible bring portable tape recorders
and pla y back at the festival.
Any message, music, conversation you want to pass around, bring it prerecord-
ed on tape so e verybody takes a piece of your tape home.
Resear ch project: to find out to what extent scrambled messages are unscram-
bled, tha t is scanned out by experimental subjects. The simplest experiments consists
in pla ying back a scrambled message to subject. Message could contain simple com-
mands . Does the scrambled message have any command value comparable to post-
hypnotic suggestion? Is the actual content of the message received? What drugs, ifany , increase ability to unscramble messages? Do subjects vary widely in this ability?Are scrambled messages in the subject’s own voice more effective than messages inother voices? Are messages scrambled in certain voices more easily unscrambled byspecific subjects? Is the message more potent with both word and image scrambleon video tape? Now to use, for example, a video tape message with a unified emo-tional content. Let us say the message is fear. For this we take all the past fear shots
of the subject we can collect or evoke. We cut these in with fear words and pictures,
and threats, etc. This is all acted out and would be upsetting in any case. Now let’stry it scrambled and see if we can get an even stronger effect. The subject’s bloodpressure, rate of heart beat, and brain waves are recorded as we play back thescrambled tape.
His face is photographed and visible to him on video screen at all times. the
actual scrambling of the tape can be done in two ways. It can be a completely ran-dom operation like pulling pieces out of a hat and if this is done several consecutiveunits may occur together yielding an identifiable picture of intelligible word. Bothmethods of course can be used at varying intervals. Blood pressure, heart beat, and 
brain wa ve recordings will show the operator what material is producing the
strongest reaction, and he will of course zero in. And remember that the subject can
see his face at all times and his face is being photographed. As the Peeping Tomsaid, the most frightening thing is fear in your own face. If the subject becomes toodisturbed we have peace and safety tapes ready .
Now here is a sex tape: This consists of a sex scene acted out by the ideal sexu-
al object of the subject and his ideal self image. Shown straight it might be exciting
enough, now scramble it. It makes a few seconds for scrambled tapes to hatch out,and then? can scrambled sex tapes zeroing in on the subject’s reactions and brainwaves result in spontaneous orgasm? Can this be extended to other functions of thebody? A mike secreted in the water closet and all his shits and farts recorded andscrambled in with stern nanny voices commanding him to shit, and the young liber-al shits his pants on the platform right under Old Glory . Could laugh tapes, sneeze
tapes, hiccough tapes, cough tapes, give rise to laughing sneezing, hiccoughing, and
coughing?
To what extent extent can physical illness be induced by scrambled tapes? Take
for example, a sound and colour picture of a subject with a cold. Later, when thesubject is fully recovered, we take colour and sound film of recovered subject. Wenow scrambled the cold pictures and sound track in with present pictures on presentpictur es. We also pr oject the cold pictur es on pr esent pictures. Now we try using
some of Mr. Hub bard’s reactive mind phrases which are supposed in themselves to
produce illness. To be me, to be you, to stay here, to stay there, to be a body , to be
bodies , to sta y present, to stay past. now we scramble this in together and show it to
the subject. Could seeing and hearing this sound and image track, scrambled down
to very small units, bring about an attack of cold virus? Is such a cold tape doesactually produce an attack of cold virus, perhaps we have merely activated a latent
virus. Many viruses, as you know, are latent in the body and may be activated. We
can try the same with coldsore, with hepatitis, always remembering that we may beactivating a latent virus and in no sense creating a laboratory virus. However, wemay be in a position to do this. Is a virus perhaps simply very small units of sound
and image? Remember the only image a virus has is the image and sound track it
can impose on you. The yellow eyes of jaundice, the postules of smallpox, etc.imposed on you against your will. The same is certainly true of scrambled word andubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
20
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
21image it can make you unscramble. Take a card, any card. This does not mean that
it is actually a virus. Perhaps to construct a laboratory virus we would need bothcamera and sound crew and a biochemist as well. I quote from the INTERNA-TIONAL PARIS TRIBUNE an article on the synthetic gene: “Dr. Har JohrdKhorana has made a gene-synthetic.”
“It is the beginning of the end,” this was the immediate reaction to this news
from the science attache’ at one of Washington’s major embassies. “If you can makegenes you can eventually make new viruses for which there are no cures. any littlecountry with good biochemists could make such biological weapons. It would take
only a small labora tory . If it can be done, somebody will do it. “For example, a
death virus could be created that carries the coded message of death. A death tape,
in fact. No doubt the tec hnical details ar e complex and perhaps a team of sound
and camera men w orking with biochemists would give us the answer.
And no w the question as to w hether scrambling techniques could be used to
spread helpful and pleasant messages. Perhaps. On the other hand, the scrambled
words and tape act like a virus in that they force something on the subject against
his will. More to the point would be to discover how the old scanning patterns couldbe altered so that subject liberates his own spontaneous scanning pattern.
NEW SCIENTIST 2 July , 1970 ...Current memory theory posits a seven sec-
ond temporary “buffer store” preceding the main one: a blow on the head wipes outmemory of this much prior time because it erases the contents of the buffer.Daedalus observes that the sense of the present also covers just this range and sosuggests that our sensory input is recorded on an endless time loop, providing some
seven seconds of delay for scanning before erasure. In this time the brain edits,
makes sense of, and selects storage key features. The weird DEJA VU sensation“now” has happened before is clearly due to brief erasure failure, so that weencounter already stored memory data coming round again. Time dragging or rac-ing must reflect tape speed. A simple experiment will demonstrate this erasureprocess in operation. Making street recordings and playing them back, you will hearthings you do not remember, sometimes said in a loud clear voice, must have beenquite close to you, nor do you necessarily remember them when you hear therecording back. The sound has bee erased according to a scanning pattern which isautomatic. This means that what you notice and store as memory as you walk down 
the str eet is scanned out of a much larger selection of data which is then erased
from the memory . For the walker the signs he passed, people he has passed, are
erased from his mind and cease to exist for him. Now to make this scanning processconscious and controllable, try this:
Walk down a city block with a camera and take what you notice, moving the
camera around as closely as possible to follow the direction of your eyes. The point
is to make the the camera your eyes and take what your eyes are scanning out of the
larger picture. At the same time take the street at a wide angle from a series of stillpositions. The street of the operator is, of course, the street as seen by the operator.It is different from the street seen at a wide angle. Much of it is in fact missing. Nowyou can make arbitrary scanning patterns - that is cover first one side of the streetand then the other in accordance with a preconceived plan. So you are breakingdown the automatic scanning patterns. You could also make colour scanning pat-
terns, that is, scan out green, blue, red, etc. in so far as you can with your camera.
That is, you are using an arbitrary preconceived scanning pattern, in order to breakdown automatic scanning patterns. a number of operators do this and then scram-ble their takes together and with wide angle tapes. This could train the subject to seeat a wider angle and also to ignore and erase at will.
Now all this is readily subject to experimental verification on control subjects.
Nor need the equipment be all on contr ol subjects . Nor need the equipment be all
that complica ted. I ha ve sho wn ho w it could work with feedback from brainwaves
and visaaceral r esponse and video tape photos of subject taken while he is seeing
and hearing the tape , simply to sho w optim um effectiveness.
You can start with two tape recorders. The simplest scrambling device is scis-
sors and splicing equipment. You can start scrambling words, make any kind oftapes and scramble them and observe the effects on friends and on yourself. Next
step is sound film and then video camera. Of course results from individual experi-
ments could lead to mass experiments, mass fear tapes, riot tapes, etc. The possibili-ties here for research and experiment are virtually unlimited and I have simplymade a few very simple suggestions
“ A virus is characterised and limited by obligate cellular parasitism. All viruses
must parasite living cells for their replication. For all viruses the infection cycle com-prises entry into the host, intracellular replication, and escape from the body of theubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
22
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
23host to initiate a new cycle in a fresh host.” I am quoting here from MECHA-
NISMS OF VIRUS INFECTION edited by Dr. Wilson Smith. In its wild state thevirus has not proved to be a very adaptable organism. Some viruses have burnedthemselves have burned out since they were 100 per cent fatal and there were noreservoirs. Each strain of virus is rigidly programed for certain attack on certain tis-
sues. If the attack fails, the virus does not gain a new host. There are, of course,
virus mutations, and the influenza virus has proved quite versatile in thisway .Generally it’s the simple repetition of the same method of entry , and if thatmethod is blocked by any body or other agency such as interferon, the attack fails.
By and lar ge, our virus is a stupid organism. Now we can think for the virus, devise
a number of alternate methods of entry . For example, the host is simultaneously
attacked b y an ally virus who tells him that everything is allright and by a pain and
fear virus . so the virus is no w using an old method of entry , namely , the tough cop
and the con cop .
We have considered the possibility that a virus can be activated or even created
by very small units of sound and image. So conceived, the virus can be made to
order in the laboratory . Ah, but for the takes to be effective, you must have also theactual virus and what is the actual virus? New viruses turn up from time to time butfrom where do they turn up? Well, lets see how we could make a virus turn up. Weplot now our virus’s symptoms and make a scramble tape. The susceptible subjects,that is those who reproduce some of the desired symptoms, will then be scrambledinto more tapes till we scramble our virus into existence. This birth of a virus occurswhen our virus is able to reproduce itself in a host and pass itself on to another
host. Perhaps, too, with the virus under laboratory control it can be tamed for useful
purposes. Imagine, for example a sex virus. it so inflames the sex centres in the backbrain that the host is driven mad from sexuality , all other considerations are blackedout Parks full of naked, frenzied people, shitting, pissing, ejaculating, and screaming.So the virus could be malignant, blacking out all regulation and end in exhaustion,convulsions, and death.
Now let us attempt the same thing with tape. We organise a sex-tape festival.
We organise a sex-tape festival. 100,000 people bring their scrambled sex tapes, andvideo tapes as well, to scramble in together. Projected on vast screens, muttering outover the crowd, sometimes it slows down, so that you see a few seconds, then scram- 
bled again, then slow down, scramble. Soon it will scramble them all naked. The
cops and the National Guard are stripping down. LET’S GET OURSELVES
SOME CIVVIES. Now a thing like that could be messy , but those who survive itrecover from the madness. Or, say , a small select group of really like-minded peopleget together with their sex tapes, you see the process is now being brought undercontrol. And the fact that anybody can do it is in itself a limiting factor.
Here is Mr. Hart, who wants to infect everyone with his own image and turn
them all into himself, so he scrambles himself and dumps himself out in search ofworthy vessels. If nobody else knows about scrambling techniques he might scram-ble himself quite a stable of replicas. but anybody can do it. So go on, scrambleyour sex words, and find suitable mates.
If you want to, scramble yourself out there, every stale joke, fart, chew, sneeze,
and stomach rumble. If your trick no work you better run. Everybody doing it, they
all scramble in together and the populations of the earth just better settle down a
nice even brown colour. Scrambles is the democratic way , the way full cellular repre-sentation. Scrambles is the American way .
I have suggested that virus can be created to order in the laboratory from very
small units of sound and image. Such a preparation is not in itself biologically activebut it could activate or even create virus in susceptible subjects. A carefully preparedjaundice tape could activ ate or cr eate or cr eate the jaundice virus in liver cells, espe-
cially in cases w here the jaundice liv er is alr eady damaged. T he operator is in effect
directing a virus revolution of the cells. Since DOR seems to attack those exposed to
it at the w eakest point, r elease of this force could coincide with virus attack.
Reactive mind phrases could serve the same purpose of rendering subjects more
susceptible to virus attack.
It will be seen that scrambled speech already has many of the charictaristics of
virus. When the speech takes and unscrambles, this occurs compulsively and against
the will of the subject. A virus must remind you of its presence. Whether it is themag of a cold sore or the torturing spasms of rabies the virus reminds you of itsunwanted presence. “HERE ME IS.”
So does scrambled word and image. The units are unscrambling compulsively ,
presenting certain words and images to the subject and this repetitive presentation isirritating certain bodily and neutral areas. The cells so irritated can produce over aubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
24
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
25period of time the biologic virus units. We now have a new virus that can be com-
municated and indeed the subject may be desparate to communicate this thing thatis bursting inside him. He is heavy with the load. Could this load be good and beau-tiful? Is it possible to create a virus which will communicate calm and sweet reason-ableness? A virus must parasitise a host in order to survive. It uses the cellular mate-
rial of the host to make copies of itself. in most cases this is damaging to the host.
The virus gains entrance by fraud and maintains itself by force. An unwanted guestwho makes you sick to look at is never good or beautiful. It is moreover a guest whoalways repeats itself word for word take for take.
Remember the life cycle of a virus ... penetration of a cell or activation within
the cell, r eplication within the cell, escape from the cell to invade other cells, escape
from host to infect a new host. T his infection can take place in many ways and those
who find themselv es heavy with the load of a new virus generally use a shotgun
technique to co ver a wide range of infection routes... cough, sneeze, spit and fart at
every opportunity , Save shit, piss, snot, scabs, sweat stained clothes and all bodily
secretions for dehydration. The composite dust can be unobtrusively billowed out a
roach bellows in subways, dropped from windows in bags, or sprayed out a cropduster ... Carry with you at all times an assortment of vectors ... lice, fleas, bed bugs,and little aviaries of mosquitoes and biting flies filled with your blood ... I see nobeauty in that.
There is only one case of favourable virus influence benefiting an obscure
species of Australian mice. On the other hand, if a virus produces no damagingsymptoms we have no way of ascertaining its existence and this happens with latent
virus infections. It has been suggested that yellow races resulted from a jaundice- like
virus which produced a permanent mutation not necessarily damaging, which waspassed along genetically . The same may be true of the word. The word itself maybe a virus that has achieved a permanent status with the host. However, no knownvirus in existence at the present time acts in this manner, so the question of a benefitvirus remains open. It seems advisable to concentrate on a general defence againstall virus.
Ron Hubbard, founder of Scientology , says that certain words and word com-
binations can produces serious illnesses and mental disturbances. I can claim someskill in the scrivener’s trade, but I cannot guarantee to write a passage that will make 
someone ph ysically ill. If Mr.Hubbard’s claim is justified, this is certainly a matter
for further research, and we can easily find out experimentally whether his claim is
justified or not. Mr. Hubbard bases the power he attributes to words on his theory ofengrams. An engram is defined as word,sound,image recorded by the subject in aperiod of pain and unconsciousness. Some of his material may be reassuring: “Ithink he’s going to be alright.” Reassuring material is an ally engram. Ally engrams,
according to Mr Hubbard, are just as bad as hostile as pain engrams. Any part of
this recording played back to the subject later will reactivate operation pain, he mayactually develop a headache and feel depressed, anxious, or tense. Well, MrHubbard’s engram theory is very easily subject to experimental verification. Taketen volunteer subjects, subject them to a pain stimulus accompanied by certainwords and sounds and images. You can act out little skits.
“Quickly , nurse , before I lose my little nigger,” bellows the southern surgeon,
and now a beefy white hand falls on the fragile black shoulder. “Yes, he’s going to be
alright. He’s going to pull through.”
If I had my way I’d let these animals die on the operating table.”“You do not have your way , you have your duty as a doctor, we must do every-
thing in our power to save human lives.”
And so forth.It is the tough cop and the con cop . The ally eng ram is inef fectiv e without the
pain eng ram, just as the con cop’ s arm ar ound y our shoulder , his soft persuasive
voice in your ear, are indeed sweet nothings without the tough cop’s blackjack. Now
to what extent can words recorded during medical unconsciousness be recalled dur-
ing hypnosis or scientological processing? To what Extent does the playback of this
material affect the subject unpleasantly? Is the effect enhanced by scrambling thematerial, pain and ally , at very short intervals? It would seem that a scrambled
engram’s picture could almost dump an operating scene right in the subject’s lap.
Mr. Hubbard has charted his version of what he calls the reactive mind. This isroughly similar to Freud’s ID, a sort of built-in self defeating mechanism. As setforth by Mr. Hubbard this consists of a number of quite ordinary phrases. He
claims that reading these phrases, or hearing them spoken, can cause illness, and
gives this as his reason for not publishing this material. Is he perhaps saying thatthese are magic words? Spells, in fact? If so, they could be quite a weapon scram-ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
26
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
27bled up with imaginative sound-and-image track. Here now is the magic that turns
men into swine. To be an animal: a lone pig grunts, shits, squeals and slobbers downgarbage. To be animals: A chorus of a thousand pigs. Cut that in with video tapepolice pictures and play it back to them and see if you get a reaction from this soreactive mind.
Now here is another. To be a body , well it’s sure an attractive body , rope the
marks in. And a nice body symphony to go with it, rhythmic heart beats, contentedstomach rumbles. To be bodies: recordings and pictures of hideous, aged, diseasedbodies farting, pissing, shitting, groaning, dying. To do everything: man in a filth
apartment sur rounded by unpaid bills, unanswered letters, jumps up and starts
washing dishes and writing letter s. To do nothing: he slumps in a chair, jumps up,
slumps in c hair, jumps up. Finally , slumps in a chair, drooling like an idiot helpless-
ness, while he looks at the disorder piled around him. The reactive mind commands
can also be used to adv antage with illness tapes . While projecting past cold sore on
to the subject’ s face, and playing him back to him a past illness tape, you can say: to
be me , to be you, to stay here, to stay there, to be a body , to be bodies, to stay in, to
stay out, to stay present, to stay absent. To what extent are these reactive mindphrases when scrambled effective in causing disagreeable symptoms in control vol-unteer subjects? As to Mr. Hubbard’s claim for the reactive mind, only research cangive us the answers.
The RM then is an artifact designed to limit and stultify on a mass scale. In
order to have this effect it must be widely implanted. This can readily be done withmodern electronic equipment and techniques described in this treatis. The RM con-
sists of commands which seem harmless and in fact unavoidable ... To be a body ...
but which have the most horrific consequences.
Here are some sample RM screen effects ...As the theatre darkens a bright light appears on the left side of the screen. The
screen lights up.
To be nobody ... On screen shadow of ladder and soldier incinerated by the
Hiroshima blast
To be everybody ... Street crowds, riots, panicsTo be me ... A beautiful girl and a handsome young man point to selvesTo be you ... They point to audience 
Hideous hags and old men, le pers, drooling idiots point to themselves and to
the audience as they intone ...
To be meTo be youCommand no 5 ... To be myselfCommand no 6 ... To be others
On screen a narcotics officer is addressing an audience of school boys, spread
out in front of him are syringes, kief pipes, samples of heroin, hashiesh, LSD.
Officer: “Five trips on a drug can be a pleasant and exciting experience...”On screen young trippers ...”I’m really myself for the first time” Etc. Happy
trips ...To be myself ...no 5 ...
Officer: “THE SIXTH WILL PROBABLY BLOW YOUR HEAD OFF”Shot shows a man blowing his head off with a shotgun in his mouth...
Officer: “Like a 15 year old boy I knew until recently , you could well end up
dying in your own spew ...” To be others no 6 ...
To be an animal ... A lone Wolf Scout ...To be animals: He joins other wolf scouts playing, laughing, shoutingTo be an animal ... Bestial and ugly human behaviour ...brawls, disgusting, eat-
ing and sex scenes
To be animals ... Co ws, shee p and pigs driv en to the slaughter house
To be a bod y
To be bodies
A beautiful bod y ... a copula ting couple ... Cut back and f orth and run on seven
second loop for several minutes ... scramble at different speeds ... Audience must be
made to realise that to be a body is to be bodies
...A body only exists to be other bodies.
To be a body ...Death scenes and recordings ... a scramble of last words
To be bodies ... Vista of cemeteries ...To do it now ... Couple embracing hotter and hotterTo do it now ... A condemned cell ... Condemned man is same actor as lover ...
He is led away by the guards screaming and struggling. Cut back and forth between
sex scene and man led to execution. Couple in sex scene have an orgasm as the con-demned man is hanged, electrocuted, gassed, garroted, shot in the head with a pistolubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
28
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
29To do it later ... The couple pull away ...One wants to go out and eat and go to
a show or something... They put on their hats
To do it later ... Warder arrives at condemned cell to tell the prisoner he has a
stay of execution
To do it now ... Grim faces in the Pentagon. Strategic is on the way ... Well
THIS IS IT ... This sequence cut in with sex scenes and a condemned man led to
execution, culminates in execution, orgasm, nuclear explosion ...The condemnedlover is a horribly burned survivor
To do it later ... 1920 walk out sequence to “The Sunny Side of the Street” ...
A disappointed general tur ns from the phone to say the president has opened top
level hot wire talks with Russia and China ... Condemned man gets another stay of
execution
To be an animal ... One lemming b usily eating lichen ...
To be animals ... Hor des of lemmings swarming all over each other in mount-
ing h ysteria ...A pile of drowned lemmings in front of somebody’s nice little cottage
on a Finnish lake w here he is methodically going through sex positions with his girl
friend. They wake up in a stink of dead lemmings
To be an animal ... Little boy put on a potTo be animals ...The man has just been hanged. The doctor steps forward with
a stethoscope
To stay down ... Body is carried out with the rope around neck ... Naked
corpses on the autopsy table ... corpse buried in quick lime.
To stay up ...Erect phallus
To stay down ... White man burns off a Negro’s genitals with blow torch ...
Theatre darkens into the blow torch on the left side of the screen
To stay presentTo stay absentTo stay present ... A boy masturbates in front of sex pictures ... Cut to face of
white man who is burning off black genitals with blow torch
To stay absent ... Sex phantasies of the boy ... The black slumps dead with gen-
itals burned off and intestines popping out
To stay present ... Boy watches strip tease, intent, fascinated ...A man stands on
trap about to be hanged
To stay present ...Sex phantasies of the boy ...”I ponounce this man dead.”
To stay present ... Boy whistles at girl in street ... A man’s body twists in the
electric chair, his leg hairs crackling a blue fire
To stay absent ... Boy sees himself in bed with girl ... Man slumps dead in chair
smoke curling from under the hood saliva dripping from his mouth...
The theatre lights up. In the sky a plane over Hiroshima ...Little Boy slides out
To stay present ... The plane, the pilot, the American flag ...
To stay absent ... theatre darkens into atomic blast on screenHere we see ordinary men and women going about their ordinary everyday
jobs and diversions ... subways, streets, buses, trains, airports, stations, waitingrooms, homes, flats, restaurants. offices, factories ...working , eating, playing, defecat-ing, making love.
A chorus of voices cuts in RM phrases
To stay up
To stay downElevators, airports, stairs, laddersTo stay inTo stay outStreet signs, door signs, people at head of lines admitted to restaurants and the-
atres
To be m yself
To be others
Customs agents c heck passports , man identifies himself at bank to cash cheque
To stay present
To stay absentPeople watching films, reading, looking at TV ...
A composite of this sound and image track is now run on seven second loop
without change for several minutes.
Now cut in the horror picturesTo stay up
To stay down
Elevators, airpits, stairs, ladders, hangings, castrationsTo stay inubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
30
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
31To stay out
Door signs, operation scenes ... doctor tosses bloody tonsils, adenoids, appendix
into receptacle
To stay presentTo stay absent
People watching film ... ether mask, ether vertigo ... triangles, spheres, rectan-
gles, pyramids, prisms, coils go away and come in regular sequence ...a coil comingin, two coils coming in, three coils coming in ... a coil going away , two coils goingaway , four going away
A coil straight ahead going a way , two coils on the left and right going away .
three coils left right and centre going away , four coils right left centre going away
A coil coming , two coils coming in, three coils coming in, four coils coming in
... spirals of light ... r ound and round faster, baby eaten by rats, hangings, electrocu-
tions , castra tions....
The RM can be cut in with the most ordinary scenes covering the planet in a
smog of fear ...
The RM is a built-in electronic police force armed with hideous threats. You
don’t want to be a cute little wolf cub? All right, cattle to the slaughter house meaton a hook.
Here is a nostalgic reconstruction of the old fashioned Mayan methods. The
wrong kind of workers with wrong thoughts are tortured to death in rooms underthe pyramid ... A young worker has been given a powerful hallucigen and a sexualstimulant ... Naked he is stripped down and skinned alive ... The Gods of pain are
surfacing from the immemorial filth of time ...The Ouab bird stands there, screams,
washing through his wild blue eyes. Others are crabs from the waist up clicking theirclaws in ecstasy , they dance around and mimic the flaved man. The scribes are busywith sketches ...Now he is strapped into a segmented copper centipede and placedgently on a bed of hot coals ... Soon the priests will dig the soft meat from the shellwith their golden claws ... Here is another youth staked out on an ant hill honeysmeared on his eyes and genitals ...Others with heavy weights on their backs areslowly dragged through the wooden troughs in which shards obsidian have beendriven ...So the priests are the masters of pain and fear and death ...To do right... toobey the priests ... To do wrong? the priest’s very presence and a few banal words.... 
The priests postulated and set up a hermetic universe of which they were the
axiomatic controllers. In so doing they became Gods who controlled the known uni-
verse of the workers. They became Fear and Pain, Death and Time. By makingopposition seemingly impossible they failed to make any provision for opposition.There is evidence that this control system broke down in some areas before thearrival of the White God. Stellae have been found defaced and overturned, mute
evidence of a worker’s revolution. How did this happen? The history of revolution-
ary movements shows that they are usually led by defectors from the ruling class.The Spanish rule in South America was overthrown by Spanish revolutionaries. TheFrench were driven out of Algeria by Algerians educated in France. Perhaps one ofthe priest Gods defected and organised a worker’s revolution ...
The priest Gods in the temple. They move very slowly , faces ravaged with age
and disease. Parasitic worms infest their flesh. They are making calculations for the
sacred books.
“400,000,000 years ago on this day a grievous thing happened...”Limestone skulls rain in through the porticos. The Young Maize God leads the
workers as they storm the temple and drag the priests out. They build a huge brushfire, throw the priests in and then throw the sacred books in after them. Time buck-les and bends. The old Gods, surfacing from the immemorial depths of time, burstin the sky ... Mr Hart stands ther e looking a t the br oken sellae ... “Ho w did this hap -
pen?”
His contr ol system must be absolute and world wide. Because such a control
system is e ven mor e vulnerable to attack from without than revolt within... Here is
Bishop Luanda burning burning sacred books. To give you an idea as to what is
happening, imagine our civilisation invaded by louts from outer space...
“Get some bulldozers in here. Clear out all this crap...” The formulae of all
natural sciences, books, paintings, the lot, swept into a vast pile and burned. and
that’s it. No one ever heard of it.
Three codices survived the vandalism of Bishop Landa and these are burned
around the edges.
No way to know if we have here the sonnets, the Mona Lisa or the remnants of
a Sears Roebuck catalogue after the old out-house burned down in a brush fire. Awhole civilisation went up in smoke...ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
32
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
33When the Spaniards arrived, they found the Mayan aristocrats lolling in ham-
mocks. Well, time to show them what is what. Five captured workers bound andstripped, are castrated on a tree stump. the bleeding sobbing, screaming bodies bod-ies thrown into a pile...
“ And now get this through your gook nuts. We want to see a pile of gold big
and we want to see it pronto. The White God has spoken.”
Consider now the human voice as a weapon. To what extent can the unaided
human voice duplicate effects that can be done with a tape recorder? Learning tospeak with the mouth shut, thus displacing your speech, is fairly easy . You can also
learn to speak backwards, which is fairly difficult. I have seen people who can repeat
what you are saying after you and finish at the same time. This is a most disconcert-
ing trick, particular ly when praciticed on a mass scale at a political rally . Is it possi-
ble to actually scramb le speech? A far-reaching biologic weapon can be forged from
a new language . In fact suc h a language already exists. It exists as Chinese, a total
language closer to m ultilevel structure of experience, with a script derived from
hieroglyphs, more closely related to the objects and areas described. The equanimity
of the Chinese is undoubtedly derived from their language being structured forgreater sanity . I notice the Chinese, wherever they are retain the written and spokenlanguage, while other immigrant peoples will lose their language in two generations.The aim of this project is to build up a language in which certain falsificationsinherit in all existing western languages will be made incapable of formulation. Thefollow-falsifications to be deleted from the proposed language.
This IS OF IDENTITY . You are an animal. You are a body . Now whatever
you may be you are not an “animal”, you are not a “body”, because these are verbal
labels. The IS of identity always carries the assignment of permanent condition. Tostay that way . All name calling presupposes the IS of identity . This concept is unnec-essary in a hieroglyphic language like ancient Egyptian and in fact frequently omit-ted. No need to say the sun IS in the sky , sun in sky suffices. The verb TO BE caneasily be omitted from any languages and the followers of Count Korgybski havedone this, eliminating the verb TO BE in English. However, it is difficult to tidy upthe English language by arbitrary exclusion of concepts which remain in force solong as the unchanged language is spoken.
THE DEFINITE ARTICLE THE. THE contains the implication of one and 
only: THE God, THE univ erse, THE way , THE right, The wrong, If there is
another, then THAT universe, THAT way is no longer THE universe, The way .
The definite article THE will be deleted and the indefinite article A will take it’splace.
THE WHOLE CONCEPT OF EITHER/OR. Right or wrong, physical or
mental, true or false, the whole concept of OR will be deleted from the language
and replaced by juxtaposition, by AND This is done to some extent in any pictorial
language where two concepts stand literally side by side. These falsifications inherentin the English and other western alphabetical languages give the reactive mind com-mands their overwhelming force in these languages. Consider the IS of identity .When I say to be me, to be you, to be myself, to be others- whatever I may be calledupon to be or to say that I am- I am not the verbal label “myself.” The word BE inthe English language contains, as a virus contains, its precoded message of damage,
the categorical imperative of permanent condition. To be a body , to be an animal.
If you see the relation of a pilot to his ship, you see crippling force of the reactivemind command to be a body . Telling the pilot to be the plane, then who will pilotthe plane?
The IS of identity , assigning a rigid and permanent status, was greatly rein-
forced by the customs and passport control the came in after World War I.Wha tever you ma y be, you are not the verbal labels in your passport. any more than
you ar e the w ord “self .” So y ou must be prepared to prove at all times that you are
what you are not. Much of the falsification inherent in the categorical definite THE.
THE no w, THE past, THE time , THE space, THE energy , THE matter, THE uni-
verse. Definite article THE contains the implications of no other. THE universe
locks you in THE, and denies the possibility of any other. If other universes are pos-sible, then the universe is no longer THE it becomes A. The definite article THE is
deleted and replaced by A. many of the RM commands are in point of fact contra-
dictory commands and a contradictory command gains its force from theAristotelian concept of either/or. To do everything, to do nothing, to have every-thing, to have nothing, to do it all, to do not any , to stay up, to stay down, to stay in,
to stay out, to stay present, to stay absent. These are in point of fact either/or
propositions. To do nothing OR everything, to have it all, OR not any , to stay pres-ent OR to stay absent. Either/or is more difficult to formulate in a written languageubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
34
ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
35where both alternatives are pictorially represented and can be deleted entirely from
the spoken language. The whole reactive mind can be in fact reduced to three littlewords - to be “THE”. That is to be what you are not, verbal formulations.
I have frequently spoken of word and image as viruses or as acting as viruses,
and this is not an allegorical comparison. It will be seen that the falsifications of syl-
labic western languages are in point of fact actual virus mechanisms. The IS of
identity the purpose of a virus is to SUR VIVE. To survive at any expense to thehost invaded. To be an animal, to be a body . To be an animal body that the viruscan invade. To be animals, to be bodies. To be more animal bodies, so that the virus
can mo ve from one body to another. To stay present as an animal body , to stay
absent as antibod y or resistance to the body invasion.
The ca tegorical THE is also a virus mechanism, locking you in THE virus uni-
verse. EITHER/OR is another virus formula. It is always you OR the virus.
EITHER/OR. T his is in point of fact the conflict formula which is seen to be
archetypical virus mechanism. The proposed language will delete these virus mecha-
nisms and make them impossib le of formulation in the language. This language will
be a tonal language like Chinese, it will also have a hieroglyphic script as pictorial aspossible without being to cumbersome or difficult to write. This language will giveone option of silence. When not talking, the user of this language can take in thesilent images of the written, pictorial and symbol languages.
I have described here a number of weapons and tactics in the war game.
Weapons that change consciousness could call the war game in question. All gamesare hostile. Basically there is only one game from here to eternity . Mr Hubbard says
that Scientology is a game where everybody wins. There are no games where every-
body wins. That’s what games are all about, winning and losing ... The VersaillesTreaty ... Hitler dances the Occupation Jig ... War criminals hang at Nuremberg ...Itis a rule of this game that there can be no final victory since this mean the end ofthe war game. Yet every player must believe in final victory and strive for it with allhis power. Faced by the nightmare of final defeat he has no alternative. So all tech-nologies with escalating efficiency produce more and more total weapons until wehave the atom bomb which could end the game by destroying all players. Now mockup a miracle. The so stupid players decide to save the game. They sit down arounda big table and draw up a plan for the immediate deactivation and eventual destruc- 
tion of all atomic weapons. Why stop there? Conventional bombs are unnecessarily
destructive if nobody has them hein? Let’s turn back the war clock back to 1917:
Keep the home fires burning Through the hearts are yearningThere’s a long, long trail winding....Back to the American Civil War...“He has loosed the fatal lightning of this terrible swift sword.” His fatal light-
ning didn’t cost as much in those days. Save a lot on the defence budget this way on
back to flintlocks, matchlocks, swords, armour, lances, bows and arrows, spears,stone axes and clubs. Why stop there? Why not grow teeth and claws, poison fangs,stingers, spines, quills, beaks and suckers and stink glands and fight in out in themuck hein?
That is what this revolution is about. End of game. New games? There are no
new games from here to eternity .
END OF THE WAR GAME.ubuclassics ubu.comthe electronic revolution                                                        william s. burroughs
36
ubuclassics
ubu.com
